Chapter 1, Verse 1
Dhritarashtra said: O Sanjaya, assembled in the holy land of Kurukshetra and desirous of battle, what did my sons and the sons of Pandu do?

Chapter 1, Verse 2
Sanjaya said: At that time, King Duryodhana, seeing the Pandava army arrayed in military formation, approached his teacher Drona and spoke these words.

Chapter 1, Verse 3
Behold, O master, this mighty army of the sons of Pandu, arrayed by the son of Drupada, your wise disciple.

Chapter 1, Verse 4
Here in this army are many heroic bowmen equal in fighting to Bhima and Arjuna; Yuyudhana, Virata, and the mighty warrior Drupada.

Chapter 1, Verse 5
There are also great heroes like Dhrishtaketu, Chekitana, the valiant king of Kashi, Purujit, Kuntibhoja, and Shaibya, the best among men.

Chapter 1, Verse 6
The powerful Yudhamanyu, the brave Uttamauja, the son of Subhadra, and the sons of Draupadi—all are mighty warriors.

Chapter 1, Verse 7
O best of the twice-born, let me tell you about the leaders who are especially distinguished on our side. These I mention as the commanders of my army.

Chapter 1, Verse 8
Yourself, Bhishma, Karna, and Kripa, victorious in war; Ashvatthama, Vikarna, and the son of Somadatta.

Chapter 1, Verse 9
And many other heroes also, well-skilled in warfare, equipped with various weapons, all prepared to lay down their lives for me.

Chapter 1, Verse 10
Our army, protected by Bhishma, is unlimited, while theirs, protected by Bhima, is limited.

Chapter 1, Verse 11
Therefore, all of you stationed in your respective positions, support Bhishma alone and protect him on all sides.

Chapter 1, Verse 12
To encourage Duryodhana, the mighty grandsire of the Kuru dynasty, Bhishma, the great valiant warrior, blew his conch loudly like the roar of a lion.

Chapter 1, Verse 13
Then all at once, conches, kettledrums, tabors, trumpets, and cow horns blared forth, creating a tumultuous sound.

Chapter 1, Verse 14
Then, seated in a grand chariot yoked with white horses, Madhava (Krishna) and the son of Pandu (Arjuna) blew their divine conches.

Chapter 1, Verse 15
Hrishikesha blew the Panchajanya; Dhananjaya blew the Devadatta; and Bhima, the voracious eater and doer of terrible deeds, blew the great conch Paundra.

Chapter 1, Verse 16
King Yudhishthira, the son of Kunti, blew the Anantavijaya; Nakula and Sahadeva blew the Sughosha and Manipushpaka respectively.

Chapter 1, Verse 17
The excellent archer, the king of Kashi, the great fighter Shikhandi, Dhrishtadyumna, Virata, and the invincible Satyaki.

Chapter 1, Verse 18
Drupada, the sons of Draupadi, and the mighty-armed son of Subhadra, O lord of the earth, blew their respective conches.

Chapter 1, Verse 19
The tumultuous sound resounded in the sky and on the earth and shattered the hearts of the sons of Dhritarashtra.

Chapter 1, Verse 20
At that time, seeing the sons of Dhritarashtra in battle array and taking up his bow, Arjuna, whose flag bore the emblem of Hanuman, spoke the following words to Krishna.

Chapter 1, Verse 21
Arjuna said: O Achyuta (Krishna), please place my chariot between the two armies.

Chapter 1, Verse 22
So that I may see those present here, who are desirous of fighting, and who I must contend with in this great battle.

Chapter 1, Verse 23
Let me observe those who have come here to fight, wishing to please the evil-minded son of Dhritarashtra.

Chapter 1, Verse 24
Sanjaya said: Thus addressed by Arjuna, Hrishikesha (Krishna), O Bharata, placed the magnificent chariot in the midst of the two armies.

Chapter 1, Verse 25
In front of Bhishma, Drona, and all the rulers of the earth, Krishna said, “Behold, O Partha, all the Kurus assembled here.”

Chapter 1, Verse 26
Then Arjuna saw standing there fathers, grandfathers, teachers, maternal uncles, brothers, sons, grandsons, friends,

Chapter 1, Verse 27
Father-in-laws and well-wishers—all in both armies. Seeing all these relatives assembled there,

Chapter 1, Verse 28
Arjuna was overwhelmed with great compassion and sorrowfully spoke the following words.

Chapter 1, Verse 29
My limbs fail, my mouth is parched, my body trembles, and my hair stands on end.

Chapter 1, Verse 30
My bow slips from my hand, and my skin burns. I am unable to stand steadily. My mind is reeling.

Chapter 1, Verse 31
O Krishna, I see adverse omens. I do not foresee any good in killing my own kinsmen in battle.

Chapter 1, Verse 32
O Krishna, I do not desire victory, kingdom, or pleasures. Of what use is a kingdom, enjoyments, or even life?

Chapter 1, Verse 33
Those for whose sake we desire kingdom, enjoyments, and pleasures—teachers, fathers, sons, grandfathers, maternal uncles, fathers-in-law, grandsons, brothers-in-law, and other relatives—

Chapter 1, Verse 34
They are all present here on the battlefield, ready to give up their lives and wealth.

Chapter 1, Verse 35
O Madhusudana, even if they kill me, I do not wish to kill them, not even for the sovereignty of the three worlds—how then for this earth?

Chapter 1, Verse 36
What pleasure will we derive from killing the sons of Dhritarashtra? Sin alone will befall us by killing these aggressors.

Chapter 1, Verse 37
Therefore, it is not right for us to kill the sons of Dhritarashtra, our own kinsmen. How can we be happy by killing our relatives, O Madhava?

Chapter 1, Verse 38
Even though they, with their intelligence clouded by greed, see no wrong in destroying families or hostility to friends,

Chapter 1, Verse 39
Why should we, who see the crime in destroying a family, not turn away from this sin?

Chapter 1, Verse 40
With the destruction of the family, the eternal family traditions are lost, and as a result, immorality overtakes the whole family.

Chapter 1, Verse 41
When irreligion prevails, O Krishna, the women of the family become corrupt, and with the corruption of women, there arises unwanted progeny.

Chapter 1, Verse 42
Such unwanted population leads the family and the destroyers of the family to hell; their ancestors fall because the offerings of food and water are stopped.

Chapter 1, Verse 43
Due to the sins of those who destroy the family and create such a corrupt population, the traditional duties of caste and family are ruined.

Chapter 1, Verse 44
O Janardana, we have heard that those whose family duties are destroyed dwell in hell indefinitely.

Chapter 1, Verse 45
Alas! How strange that we are prepared to commit a great sin by killing our own kinsmen out of greed for royal pleasures.

Chapter 1, Verse 46
It would be better for me if the sons of Dhritarashtra, weapons in hand, killed me in battle while I am unarmed and unresisting.

Chapter 1, Verse 47
Sanjaya said: Thus, speaking on the battlefield, with a mind overwhelmed with sorrow, Arjuna sat down in the chariot, casting aside his bow and arrows.

Chapter 2, Verse 1
Sanjaya said: Seeing Arjuna full of compassion and very sorrowful, his eyes brimming with tears, Madhusudana spoke the following words.

Chapter 2, Verse 2
The Supreme Lord said: My dear Arjuna, how has this delusion come upon you at this critical moment? It is not befitting a noble person, and it will not lead to heaven, but to infamy.

Chapter 2, Verse 3
Do not yield to this unmanliness, O son of Pritha. It does not become you. Give up such petty weakness of heart and arise, O chastiser of the enemy!

Chapter 2, Verse 4
Arjuna said: O Madhusudana, how can I counterattack Bhishma and Drona with arrows in battle, they who are worthy of my worship?

Chapter 2, Verse 5
It is better to live in this world by begging than to live at the cost of the lives of great souls who are my teachers. Though desiring worldly gain, they are superiors. If they are killed, our spoils will be tainted with blood.

Chapter 2, Verse 6
Nor do we know which is better—whether we conquer them or they conquer us. The sons of Dhritarashtra, whom if we kill, we should not care to live, are now standing before us on this battlefield.

Chapter 2, Verse 7
Now I am confused about my duty and have lost all composure because of weakness. In this condition, I ask You to tell me clearly what is best for me. I am Your disciple, and I surrender unto You. Please instruct me.

Chapter 2, Verse 8
I do not see how any means can relieve the grief which is drying up my senses. Even if I gain an unrivaled and prosperous kingdom on earth or the sovereignty of the gods in heaven.

Chapter 2, Verse 9
Sanjaya said: Having spoken thus, Arjuna cast aside his bow and arrows and sat down on the chariot, his mind overwhelmed with sorrow.

Chapter 2, Verse 10
O Bharata, at that time, Krishna, smiling in the midst of both armies, spoke the following words to the grief-stricken Arjuna.

Chapter 2, Verse 11
The Blessed Lord said: You are mourning for what is not worthy of grief, and yet you speak words of wisdom. The wise grieve neither for the living nor the dead.

Chapter 2, Verse 12
Never was there a time when I did not exist, nor you, nor all these kings; nor in the future shall any of us cease to be.

Chapter 2, Verse 13
Just as the boyhood, youth, and old age come to the embodied soul in this body, in the same manner, is the attaining of another body; the wise are not deluded by this.

Chapter 2, Verse 14
O son of Kunti, the contact of the senses with sense objects gives rise to cold and heat, pleasure and pain. They come and go, and are impermanent. Endure them bravely, O Arjuna.

Chapter 2, Verse 15
That person who is not disturbed by happiness and distress, and is steady in both, becomes eligible for liberation.

Chapter 2, Verse 16
Those who are seers of the truth have concluded that of the nonexistent, there is no endurance, and of the eternal, there is no cessation. This they have concluded by studying the nature of both.

Chapter 2, Verse 17
Know that which pervades the entire body is indestructible. No one can destroy the imperishable soul.

Chapter 2, Verse 18
Only the material body is perishable; the soul is eternal, indestructible, and immeasurable. Therefore, fight, O descendant of Bharata!

Chapter 2, Verse 19
He who thinks the soul kills, and he who thinks the soul is killed, are both ignorant. The soul kills not, nor is it killed.

Chapter 2, Verse 20
For the soul, there is neither birth nor death at any time. It has not come into being, does not come into being, and will not come into being. It is unborn, eternal, ever-existing, and primeval. It is not slain when the body is slain.

Chapter 2, Verse 21
O Partha, how can a person who knows that the soul is indestructible, eternal, unborn, and immutable kill anyone or cause anyone to kill?

Chapter 2, Verse 22
As a person puts on new garments, giving up old ones, similarly, the soul accepts new material bodies, giving up the old and useless ones.

Chapter 2, Verse 23
Weapons cannot cut the soul, fire cannot burn it, water cannot wet it, and the wind cannot dry it.

Chapter 2, Verse 24
This soul is unbreakable and insoluble, and it can be neither burned nor dried. It is eternal, all-pervading, unchangeable, immovable, and ever-present.

Chapter 2, Verse 25
It is said that the soul is invisible, inconceivable, and immutable. Knowing this, you should not grieve for the body.

Chapter 2, Verse 26
Even if you think that the soul is born and dies constantly, still you have no reason to lament, O mighty-armed.

Chapter 2, Verse 27
For one who has taken birth, death is certain, and for one who is dead, birth is certain. Therefore, in this unavoidable situation, you should not lament.

Chapter 2, Verse 28
All beings are unmanifest in their beginning, manifest in their interim state, and unmanifest again when annihilated. So what need is there for lamentation?

Chapter 2, Verse 29
Some look at the soul as amazing, some describe it as amazing, and some hear of it as amazing, while others, even after hearing about it, cannot understand it at all.

Chapter 2, Verse 30
O descendant of Bharata, he who dwells in the body is eternal and can never be slain. Therefore, you should not grieve for any creature.

Chapter 2, Verse 31
Considering your dharma, you should not waver. For a warrior, there is nothing more honorable than a righteous war.

Chapter 2, Verse 32
O Partha, happy are the warriors to whom such opportunities come, opening for them the doors of the heavenly realms.

Chapter 2, Verse 33
But if you do not engage in this righteous war, then you will fail your duty and lose your reputation—and incur sin.

Chapter 2, Verse 34
People will speak of your infamy for all time. And to the honored, infamy is worse than death.

Chapter 2, Verse 35
The great warriors who have highly esteemed your name will think that you have withdrawn from battle out of fear.

Chapter 2, Verse 36
Your enemies will describe you in unkind words and ridicule your ability. What could be more painful than this?

Chapter 2, Verse 37
If you are killed, you will attain heaven. If you are victorious, you will enjoy the kingdom on earth. Therefore, arise, O son of Kunti, and be determined to fight.

Chapter 2, Verse 38
Treating pleasure and pain, gain and loss, victory and defeat alike, engage in battle for the sake of duty. Thus you shall not incur sin.

Chapter 2, Verse 39
I have explained this knowledge to you through the analytical path of Sankhya. Now listen as I explain the knowledge of yoga. When you act with this understanding, you will be freed from the bondage of karma.

Chapter 2, Verse 40
In this endeavor, no effort is ever lost, and there is no harm. Even a little progress on this path protects one from great fear.

Chapter 2, Verse 41
Those on this path have a resolute purpose. O child of the Kurus, the intelligence of the resolute is single-pointed, but the thoughts of the irresolute are many-branched.

Chapter 2, Verse 42
Those who are unwise, delighting in the flowery words of the Vedas, claim that there is nothing else. Their hearts are full of desires, and they seek only heaven.

Chapter 2, Verse 43
They speak of various elaborate rites and promise birth as the reward of actions. They desire enjoyment and power and are attracted to heaven.

Chapter 2, Verse 44
The intelligence of those attached to pleasure and power, who are drawn away by those words, cannot develop the resolute determination for samadhi.

Chapter 2, Verse 45
The Vedas deal with the three modes of material nature. Rise above these modes, O Arjuna! Be free from all dualities, always remain balanced, and be established in the Self.

Chapter 2, Verse 46
All the purposes served by a small well can be served by a great reservoir of water. Similarly, all the purposes of the Vedas are fulfilled to one who knows the Supreme.

Chapter 2, Verse 47
You have a right to perform your prescribed duties, but you are not entitled to the fruits of your actions. Never consider yourself the cause of the results, and never be attached to inaction.

Chapter 2, Verse 48
Be steadfast in yoga, O Arjuna. Perform your duty and abandon all attachment to success or failure. Such evenness of mind is called yoga.

Chapter 2, Verse 49
Far inferior is action motivated by desire to action in the state of equanimity. Seek refuge in this even-mindedness. Those who are motivated by fruits are miserable.

Chapter 2, Verse 50
A person established in yoga discards both good and evil results in this life. Therefore, strive for yoga, for yoga is skill in action.

Chapter 2, Verse 51
By renouncing the fruits of action, the yogis purify the mind, and attain the eternal abode, free from the bondage of birth and death.

Chapter 2, Verse 52
When your intellect crosses the illusion of delusion, you will become indifferent to all that you have heard and all that is yet to be heard.

Chapter 2, Verse 53
When your mind becomes unwavering and fixed in deep meditation, then you will attain divine consciousness.

Chapter 2, Verse 54
Arjuna said: What are the signs of one whose mind is steady in wisdom and who is immersed in samadhi? How does such a person speak, sit, and walk?

Chapter 2, Verse 55
The Lord said: One who gives up all desires of the mind and remains satisfied in the self alone is said to be steady in wisdom.

Chapter 2, Verse 56
He whose mind is not shaken by sorrow or elated by pleasure, who is free from attachment, fear, and anger, is called a sage of steady wisdom.

Chapter 2, Verse 57
He who remains unattached in all circumstances, who neither rejoices nor hates when he obtains good or evil, is firmly fixed in perfect knowledge.

Chapter 2, Verse 58
One who can withdraw the senses from their objects, just as a tortoise withdraws its limbs into its shell, is firmly fixed in wisdom.

Chapter 2, Verse 59
The objects of the senses turn away from a person who abstains from them, but the taste for them remains. Even this taste ceases when one sees the Supreme.

Chapter 2, Verse 60
The senses are so strong and impetuous, O Arjuna, that they can forcibly carry away the mind even of a person of discrimination.

Chapter 2, Verse 61
One should control them and bring the mind under the self. Having fixed the mind on Me, one becomes firmly grounded in wisdom.

Chapter 2, Verse 62
While contemplating the objects of the senses, a person develops attachment to them. From attachment comes desire, and from desire, anger arises.

Chapter 2, Verse 63
From anger arises delusion; from delusion, loss of memory; from loss of memory, the destruction of discrimination; and with the destruction of discrimination, one is lost.

Chapter 2, Verse 64
But one who controls the senses and is free from attachment and aversion, even while using the senses, attains tranquility.

Chapter 2, Verse 65
In that peace, all sorrows are destroyed. The intellect of such a tranquil person soon becomes steady.

Chapter 2, Verse 66
There is no knowledge for the unsteady, nor is there meditation. Without meditation, there is no peace, and without peace, where is happiness?

Chapter 2, Verse 67
Just as a strong wind sweeps away a boat on water, even so, the mind that follows the wandering senses carries away one’s intelligence.

Chapter 2, Verse 68
Therefore, O mighty-armed one, whose senses are withdrawn from their objects—his intelligence is firmly fixed.

Chapter 2, Verse 69
What is night for all beings is the time of awakening for the self-controlled; and the time of awakening for all beings is night for the introspective sage.

Chapter 2, Verse 70
A person who is not disturbed by the incessant flow of desires—that enter like rivers into the ocean, which is ever being filled but is always still—can alone achieve peace.

Chapter 2, Verse 71
One who abandons all desires and acts free from longing, without the sense of ‘I’ or ‘mine,’ attains peace.

Chapter 2, Verse 72
This is the state of Brahman. Having attained this, one is not deluded. Being established in this even at the time of death, one attains the Supreme.

Chapter 3, Verse 1
Arjuna said: O Janardana, if knowledge is superior to action, why then do you engage me in this terrible action?

Chapter 3, Verse 2
You seem to confuse my intellect with contradictory words. Tell me decisively what is better for me.

Chapter 3, Verse 3
The Blessed Lord said: In this world, two paths were given by Me long ago — the path of knowledge for the contemplative, and the path of action for the active.

Chapter 3, Verse 4
A person does not attain freedom from action by merely abstaining from work, nor does he attain perfection by renunciation alone.

Chapter 3, Verse 5
No one can remain inactive even for a moment, for everyone is helplessly driven to action by the qualities born of nature.

Chapter 3, Verse 6
One who restrains the senses and sits with the mind dwelling on sense objects, is a pretender, deluding himself.

Chapter 3, Verse 7
But one who controls the senses with the mind, O Arjuna, and engages in Karma Yoga with the organs of action, is superior.

Chapter 3, Verse 8
You should perform your prescribed duty, for action is better than inaction. Even the maintenance of your body is not possible without action.

Chapter 3, Verse 9
The world is bound by action unless it is done as a sacrifice. Therefore, perform action for that sake and be free from attachment.

Chapter 3, Verse 10
In the beginning, the Creator created humans along with sacrifice and said: 'By this shall you prosper; this shall be the giver of all desires.'

Chapter 3, Verse 11
Nourish the gods through sacrifice, and they will nourish you. Thus nourishing one another, you shall attain the highest good.

Chapter 3, Verse 12
The gods, nourished by sacrifice, will give you desired objects. But he who enjoys their gifts without offering them is a thief.

Chapter 3, Verse 13
The righteous who eat the remnants of sacrifice are freed from all sins. But the sinful who cook for themselves eat only sin.

Chapter 3, Verse 14
All beings are nourished by food, food is produced by rain, rain is produced by sacrifice, and sacrifice is born of action.

Chapter 3, Verse 15
Know that action arises from the Vedas, and the Vedas arise from the Imperishable. Therefore, the all-pervading Infinite is always present in sacrifice.

Chapter 3, Verse 16
He who does not follow this wheel set in motion, living in sin, indulging in the senses — he lives in vain.

Chapter 3, Verse 17
But the one who delights in the Self, is satisfied in the Self, and is content in the Self alone, has no duty.

Chapter 3, Verse 18
Such a person has no purpose in what he does, nor does he depend on any being for anything.

Chapter 3, Verse 19
Therefore, perform your duty without attachment. By doing so, one attains the Supreme.

Chapter 3, Verse 20
Indeed, it was by action alone that Janaka and others attained perfection. You should also act for the good of the world.

Chapter 3, Verse 21
Whatever a great person does, others follow. Whatever standard he sets, the world follows it.

Chapter 3, Verse 22
There is nothing for Me to do in all the worlds, nor anything unattained to gain — yet I engage in action.

Chapter 3, Verse 23
If I did not act carefully, O Partha, people would follow My example in every way.

Chapter 3, Verse 24
If I stopped acting, these worlds would perish. I would be the cause of confusion and destruction of all beings.

Chapter 3, Verse 25
Just as the ignorant act with attachment, the wise should act without attachment — for the welfare of the world.

Chapter 3, Verse 26
Let no wise person unsettle the minds of the ignorant who are attached to action. Instead, encourage them by performing duties in the right spirit.

Chapter 3, Verse 27
All actions are carried out by the qualities of nature. Deluded by ego, people think, 'I am the doer.'

Chapter 3, Verse 28
But the one who knows the truth understands that it is the qualities acting upon the qualities — and is not attached.

Chapter 3, Verse 29
Those deluded by the qualities of nature become attached to actions. The wise should not disturb their understanding.

Chapter 3, Verse 30
Surrender all actions to Me, with your mind focused on the Self, free from desire and ego — fight, without mental agitation.

Chapter 3, Verse 31
Those who follow this teaching with faith and without envy are freed from the bondage of action.

Chapter 3, Verse 32
But those who envy and do not follow this teaching are deluded and ignorant — they are lost.

Chapter 3, Verse 33
Even a wise person acts according to their own nature. All beings follow their nature. What will restraint accomplish?

Chapter 3, Verse 34
Attachment and aversion to sense objects exist. One should not come under their control — they are obstacles.

Chapter 3, Verse 35
Better is one's own duty, even if imperfect, than another's duty well-performed. Better to die in one's own duty than follow another’s which brings fear.

Chapter 3, Verse 36
Arjuna said: Then what impels a person to sin, even unwillingly, as if by force, O Krishna?

Chapter 3, Verse 37
The Blessed Lord said: It is desire, it is anger — born of passion — a great devourer, a great sinner. Know this as the enemy here.

Chapter 3, Verse 38
As fire is covered by smoke, a mirror by dust, and an embryo by the womb, so is wisdom covered by desire.

Chapter 3, Verse 39
O Arjuna, wisdom is covered by this eternal enemy of the wise, in the form of desire, the insatiable fire.

Chapter 3, Verse 40
The senses, the mind, and the intellect are said to be its seat. Through them, it deludes the embodied being, veiling wisdom.

Chapter 3, Verse 41
Therefore, O best of the Bharatas, restrain the senses and destroy this sinful force, the destroyer of knowledge and wisdom.

Chapter 3, Verse 42
The senses are higher than the body, the mind is higher than the senses, and the intellect is higher than the mind. But the Self is higher than the intellect.

Chapter 3, Verse 43
Thus, knowing the Self to be higher than the intellect, steady the mind with the Self and destroy this enemy — desire, difficult to conquer.

Chapter 4, Verse 1
The Blessed Lord said: I taught this imperishable science to Vivasvan, the Sun God; Vivasvan taught it to Manu, the father of mankind; and Manu taught it to Ikshvaku.

Chapter 4, Verse 2
This ancient science of the Self has been lost to the world due to long usage, O Bharata. Today, I teach it to you, for you are My devotee and My friend. This secret is the most profound.

Chapter 4, Verse 3
Arjuna said: O Krishna, you were born after Vivasvan; how then did you teach this science to him in the beginning?

Chapter 4, Verse 4
The Blessed Lord said: O Partha, long ago, I was born and I taught this science to Vivasvan. This is a truth, and I also remember all my past lives. But you do not remember, O scorcher of enemies!

Chapter 4, Verse 5
Although I am unborn and my divine form is imperishable, and although I am the Lord of all beings, yet, by My own divine power, I manifest myself in this world through My Maya.

Chapter 4, Verse 6
Whenever there is a decline in righteousness and a rise in unrighteousness, O Arjuna, at that time I manifest Myself on earth.

Chapter 4, Verse 7
To protect the righteous, to annihilate the wicked, and to re-establish the principles of dharma, I appear millennium after millennium.

Chapter 4, Verse 8
One who knows the transcendental nature of My Divine Birth and My activities, does not, upon leaving the body, take his birth again; he comes to Me, O Arjuna.

Chapter 4, Verse 9
One who performs his duty without attachment, offering the results to Me, is free from sin and reaches the ultimate goal.

Chapter 4, Verse 10
Those who are free from pride and delusion, who have conquered the mind, and who are always absorbed in Me, are free from the cycle of birth and death.

Chapter 4, Verse 11
All beings in the world are bound by the gunas of nature, but the one who has overcome them, who has transcended the three gunas, is free.

Chapter 4, Verse 12
Arjuna said: O Krishna, you have declared that the ultimate goal of human life is to transcend the material world. But, what about those who perform actions for selfish gain?

Chapter 4, Verse 13
The Blessed Lord said: The way to transcend material bondage is through devotion to the supreme. Those who seek the Supreme, through this process, are liberated.

Chapter 4, Verse 14
Even the learned transcend the cycle of birth and death through knowledge, but the rest of the world follows the principle of karma, fulfilling their desires.

Chapter 4, Verse 15
O Arjuna, the yogis who take refuge in Me and perform their duties with dedication and devotion to the Divine, shall be free from all bondage and reach the goal.

Chapter 4, Verse 16
The yogis who practice the art of meditation and surrender their actions to the Divine, achieving perfection, are freed from the shackles of the material world.

Chapter 4, Verse 17
Those who seek liberation through detachment, abandoning all worldly desires, are capable of performing great works of charity and service.

Chapter 4, Verse 18
The Blessed Lord said: It is through the surrender of the ego and renunciation of desire that one achieves the highest goal.

Chapter 4, Verse 19
Those who perform actions with devotion and without attachment, offering all results to the Divine, are freed from material bondage and attain peace.

Chapter 4, Verse 20
Even those who are performing worldly tasks can transcend material bondage if they dedicate their actions to the Divine.

Chapter 4, Verse 21
Those who dedicate their entire life to the service of the Divine, who are engaged in performing their duties selflessly, shall never experience any negative result.

Chapter 4, Verse 22
The wise person offers all actions to the Divine, performing them in a spirit of devotion, and thereby transcends the cycle of birth and death.

Chapter 4, Verse 23
The one who is free from the fruits of action and offers them to the Divine, performing without attachment, reaches the ultimate goal.

Chapter 4, Verse 24
Just as a fire burns away all fuel, similarly, the knowledge of the Self burns away all the accumulated effects of past actions.

Chapter 4, Verse 25
Those who possess this supreme knowledge are free from all desire and attachment, for they have realized their oneness with the Divine.

Chapter 4, Verse 26
The wise who offer their actions to the Divine without attachment are unaffected by the fruits of their actions and live in peace.

Chapter 4, Verse 27
The one who performs actions for the benefit of others without attachment and with devotion shall be freed from the cycle of rebirth.

Chapter 4, Verse 28
Performing duties without attachment to the results, the one who surrenders all actions to the Divine attains liberation.

Chapter 4, Verse 29
The one who has renounced all attachments and offers their actions to the Divine attains peace and is freed from the cycle of birth and death.

Chapter 4, Verse 30
The one who performs actions selflessly and without attachment is not affected by the consequences, and becomes free from all bondage.

Chapter 4, Verse 31
The one who is free from ego and attachment and dedicates all their actions to the Divine shall never be subject to rebirth.

Chapter 4, Verse 32
Those who perform their duties selflessly, offering all results to the Divine, are the true yogis and attain peace.

Chapter 4, Verse 33
The knowledge of the Self is the supreme knowledge, which is the key to liberation. Those who possess this knowledge become free from the cycle of birth and death.

Chapter 4, Verse 34
Seek out the wise and learn from them, by submitting to their guidance and serving them with sincerity. This is the path to attaining the supreme wisdom.

Chapter 4, Verse 35
When you have obtained this knowledge, you will see all beings in the same light, and be free from the bonds of attachment and ego.

Chapter 4, Verse 36
Even if you are the most sinful of all sinners, you can cross over all sins by the boat of knowledge. There is no purifier greater than knowledge.

Chapter 4, Verse 37
In this world, there is nothing more powerful and purifying than knowledge. He who has attained knowledge realizes the Self in all beings.

Chapter 4, Verse 38
The knowledge of the Self is the key to liberation. It eradicates all doubts and leads one to the realization of the Supreme.

Chapter 4, Verse 39
A person who has realized the Self, through the cultivation of knowledge, is freed from the bondage of action and attains the highest state of peace.

Chapter 4, Verse 40
Those who lack wisdom and knowledge, who are not devoted to the Divine, are bound by the material world and continue to experience the effects of their actions.

Chapter 4, Verse 41
The one who is free from all attachment and desire, who has mastered the knowledge of the Self, transcends the cycle of birth and death.

Chapter 4, Verse 42
Therefore, O Arjuna, perform your actions with devotion and offer the results to the Divine, for that is the way to liberation.

Chapter 5, Verse 1
Arjuna said: O Krishna, you have praised renunciation of action (sannyasa) and also the performance of action (karma yoga). Tell me decisively which is better.

Chapter 5, Verse 2
The Blessed Lord said: Renunciation of action (sannyasa) and the performance of action (karma yoga) both lead to liberation, but of the two, the performance of action is superior.

Chapter 5, Verse 3
One who does not renounce his duties, but performs them with detachment, is superior to the one who simply renounces without understanding the nature of true renunciation.

Chapter 5, Verse 4
Those who are true renunciates and those who are true yogis are the same. Both act without attachment and are devoted to the Supreme.

Chapter 5, Verse 5
A true renunciant is one who is free from desire, attachment, and self-interest. Such a person performs action without being affected by its results.

Chapter 5, Verse 6
The true yogi is one who has renounced the fruits of action, and is free from the influence of ego and desires. Such a person is truly free.

Chapter 5, Verse 7
The one who is free from attachment and has renounced all desire for worldly gains is a true yogi and will attain liberation.

Chapter 5, Verse 8
A yogi is one who has conquered his mind and senses, and is unaffected by the distractions of the material world.

Chapter 5, Verse 9
One who has renounced the ego and desires and offers all actions to the Divine is liberated, irrespective of their outward behavior.

Chapter 5, Verse 10
He who performs actions with a purified mind, without attachment, is free from sin and attains the Supreme.

Chapter 5, Verse 11
Those who perform actions with a detached mind, offering the results to the Divine, are liberated from all desires and attain liberation.

Chapter 5, Verse 12
By performing actions with detachment and surrendering the fruits to the Supreme, the yogi becomes free from the bondage of birth and death.

Chapter 5, Verse 13
The one who has completely surrendered to the Supreme, who has transcended all ego and desires, attains the ultimate state of peace and liberation.

Chapter 5, Verse 14
The Lord does not take credit for any action or its result. It is the divine will that governs all actions, and thus all actions are performed through the agency of the qualities of nature.

Chapter 5, Verse 15
Those who are free from desires and are devoted to the Supreme are not affected by the fruits of their actions. They perform all duties with detachment and are unaffected by praise or blame.

Chapter 5, Verse 16
A true yogi is one who sees all beings equally, and is unaffected by pleasure or pain, success or failure.

Chapter 5, Verse 17
The yogi who has renounced all desires, and who has attained the state of equanimity, is free from bondage and has attained the Supreme.

Chapter 5, Verse 18
One who has a pure heart, who has conquered the senses, and who performs actions with devotion to the Divine, will attain liberation.

Chapter 5, Verse 19
The person who has transcended the three gunas (qualities of nature) and is unaffected by them, who is free from desires and ego, attains peace.

Chapter 5, Verse 20
Those who are unaffected by material attachments and who perform their actions with equanimity, have transcended the gunas and are freed from all desires.

Chapter 5, Verse 21
The true yogi is the one who is indifferent to the material world and is focused entirely on the Supreme. Such a person lives in peace and freedom.

Chapter 5, Verse 22
The one who has transcended all desires and is devoted to the Supreme, who performs all actions as an offering to the Divine, is liberated from all bondage.

Chapter 5, Verse 23
Those who have attained true renunciation and yoga are unaffected by the changes of the material world. They are free from the limitations of body and mind.

Chapter 5, Verse 24
One who has established a deep connection with the Divine, who sees the Supreme in all beings, is free from the cycles of birth and death.

Chapter 5, Verse 25
Those who are free from ego and attachment, and who perform actions with the knowledge of the Self, are true yogis and attain liberation.

Chapter 5, Verse 26
A true yogi is one who sees all beings as equal, who is free from desires and attachments, and who is always absorbed in the Supreme.

Chapter 5, Verse 27
One who has conquered the mind and senses, who is free from all desires, and who sees the Divine in all beings, is the true yogi.

Chapter 5, Verse 28
The true yogi is one who has realized the oneness of all beings, and who sees no distinction between self and others.

Chapter 5, Verse 29
The one who has attained this state of consciousness, who is free from ego and attachment, and who sees the Divine in all beings, is liberated.

Chapter 6, Verse 1
The Blessed Lord said: The yogi who performs his duties without attachment, renouncing the fruits of his actions, is superior to the ascetic, the learned, and the self-denying.

Chapter 6, Verse 2
The Blessed Lord said: The yogi who is steadfast and whose mind is disciplined, who has renounced all material desires and is free from attachment, is a true yogi.

Chapter 6, Verse 3
Arjuna said: O Krishna, you have described the renunciation of actions as the best, and the performance of actions as inferior. But I see a contradiction in your words. Please clarify.

Chapter 6, Verse 4
The Blessed Lord said: O Arjuna, a true yogi does not renounce actions but renounces attachment to them. He who works with attachment to the fruits of his actions, is far from liberation.

Chapter 6, Verse 5
Let a man lift himself by his own efforts, and let him not degrade himself; for the self is the friend of the self, and the self is the enemy of the self.

Chapter 6, Verse 6
For him who has conquered the mind, the mind is the best of friends. But for one who has not subdued the mind, the mind is the greatest enemy.

Chapter 6, Verse 7
The yogi who is detached, with a mind that is steady, and whose senses are under control, can experience the highest bliss.

Chapter 6, Verse 8
He who is free from envy, who has a tranquil mind, who sees the Self in all beings, and is unaffected by pain and pleasure, is a true yogi.

Chapter 6, Verse 9
The yogi who considers all beings as his own self, and who is free from attachment, is free from fear and desires.

Chapter 6, Verse 10
A true yogi is one who is balanced in his thoughts, actions, and emotions. He is free from the distractions of the world and is always absorbed in the Supreme.

Chapter 6, Verse 11
To practice yoga, one must create a quiet and comfortable place, sit in a firm posture, and practice meditation with a focused mind.

Chapter 6, Verse 12
In this practice, one must control the breath and focus the mind on the divine, observing complete discipline over body, mind, and senses.

Chapter 6, Verse 13
The yogi should sit in a place that is secluded, free from distractions, and maintain the body in a steady posture to focus the mind.

Chapter 6, Verse 14
The yogi should sit with a straight back, regulate the breath, and keep the mind calm, with the focus on the divine. In this state, he is free from all worldly distractions.

Chapter 6, Verse 15
By practicing such control over the mind and body, a yogi attains inner peace and ultimately realizes the Supreme.

Chapter 6, Verse 16
The Blessed Lord said: A person who eats too much, sleeps too much, or does not eat or sleep enough, is not a true yogi.

Chapter 6, Verse 17
A true yogi is one who maintains moderation in eating, sleeping, and other habits. He is not attached to material pleasures.

Chapter 6, Verse 18
A yogi, who is balanced in his actions, mind, and emotions, is free from desires and enjoys the bliss of peace.

Chapter 6, Verse 19
When the mind is completely controlled and the senses are detached, the yogi attains perfect peace and harmony.

Chapter 6, Verse 20
The yogi whose mind is absorbed in the divine, who has mastered control over the senses, attains the highest state of consciousness.

Chapter 6, Verse 21
One whose mind is focused on the divine and who experiences the bliss of yoga is unaffected by the distractions of the material world.

Chapter 6, Verse 22
A true yogi, who has gained mastery over his mind, can see the divine presence in all beings and in all situations.

Chapter 6, Verse 23
The Blessed Lord said: When the mind is trained in detachment and discipline, it becomes a powerful tool for realizing the Supreme.

Chapter 6, Verse 24
A person who practices yoga with complete devotion, renouncing all desires, will attain the state of perfect peace.

Chapter 6, Verse 25
Through the practice of meditation, the yogi can free himself from all desires, and his mind will naturally merge with the divine.

Chapter 6, Verse 26
If the mind wanders away from the focus, the yogi should bring it back with effort and concentration, for it is the mind that controls the self.

Chapter 6, Verse 27
The yogi who is able to control the mind, and who meditates upon the divine with unwavering faith, will experience the highest bliss.

Chapter 6, Verse 28
By practicing yoga with devotion, a yogi transcends the material world and attains union with the divine.

Chapter 6, Verse 29
A yogi is one who sees the divine presence in all beings, and who is detached from the material world.

Chapter 6, Verse 30
One who sees the Supreme Lord in all beings, and sees all beings in the Supreme Lord, attains liberation.

Chapter 6, Verse 31
The yogi who has attained control over his mind and senses is free from attachment and is devoted to the Supreme.

Chapter 6, Verse 32
The Blessed Lord said: A yogi who practices detachment, who has control over his mind and senses, and who is free from desires, reaches the highest state of peace.

Chapter 6, Verse 33
Arjuna said: O Krishna, the mind is restless and difficult to control. How can a person whose mind is disturbed by desires practice yoga?

Chapter 6, Verse 34
The Blessed Lord said: Undoubtedly, O mighty-armed, the mind is restless and difficult to control, but through constant practice and detachment, it can be controlled.

Chapter 6, Verse 35
The Blessed Lord said: There is no greater difficulty than the control of the restless mind, but through practice and renunciation, one can overcome it.

Chapter 6, Verse 36
Arjuna said: O Krishna, you have said that through practice and detachment, one can control the mind. But the mind is indeed very turbulent and difficult to control.

Chapter 6, Verse 37
The Blessed Lord said: O Arjuna, the person who makes a sincere attempt, with unwavering faith and practice, will definitely attain perfection, even if they fail initially.

Chapter 6, Verse 38
The Blessed Lord said: The yogi who has faith and who practices with determination, even if he falls short of perfection, will be born into a noble family in his next life.

Chapter 6, Verse 39
Such a person is born into a family that is rich in wisdom, and he continues his spiritual journey until he achieves liberation.

Chapter 6, Verse 40
The yogi who has not attained perfection in this life, but who has made sincere effort, will never fail. He is always guided by divine grace.

Chapter 6, Verse 41
Arjuna said: O Krishna, how can one who has made an effort in yoga but has failed, be born into a family that is noble and spiritually rich?

Chapter 6, Verse 42
The Blessed Lord said: Those who have made sincere efforts in their past lives are always reborn into the best of circumstances, and they continue their journey towards liberation.

Chapter 6, Verse 43
The Blessed Lord said: The yogi who is devoted to the divine, who has controlled his mind and senses, and who is free from attachment, attains the ultimate state of liberation.

Chapter 6, Verse 44
Such a yogi, after many lives, attains supreme peace, and will be united with the divine, realizing the highest knowledge.

Chapter 6, Verse 45
A true yogi, by meditating upon the divine with a pure heart and mind, is free from all desires and attains the supreme state of peace.

Chapter 6, Verse 46
The Blessed Lord said: Among all yogis, the one who worships the divine with devotion and faith is the best, for he has attained the highest state of liberation.

Chapter 6, Verse 47
The yogi who is devoted to the divine, who performs all actions as an offering to the Supreme, is the greatest of all yogis and attains supreme peace.

Chapter 7, Verse 1
The Blessed Lord said: O Arjuna, listen how by practicing yoga with your mind attached to Me and taking refuge in Me, you will know Me in full, free from doubt.

Chapter 7, Verse 2
I shall now declare to you in full this knowledge and wisdom, knowing which nothing more remains to be known in this world.

Chapter 7, Verse 3
Among thousands of men, one may strive for perfection; and of those who have achieved perfection, hardly one knows Me in truth.

Chapter 7, Verse 4
Earth, water, fire, air, ether, mind, intellect, and ego—these eight are My separated material energies.

Chapter 7, Verse 5
Besides this, O mighty-armed Arjuna, there is another superior energy of Mine, which comprises the living entities who are sustaining the universe.

Chapter 7, Verse 6
All created beings have their source in these two natures. Of all that is material and spiritual in this world, know for certain that I am both the origin and dissolution.

Chapter 7, Verse 7
O conqueror of wealth, there is nothing higher than Me. Everything rests upon Me, like pearls strung on a thread.

Chapter 7, Verse 8
O son of Kunti, I am the taste of water, the light of the sun and moon, the sacred syllable Om in the Vedas, the sound in ether, and ability in man.

Chapter 7, Verse 9
I am the sweet fragrance of the earth, and I am the heat in fire. I am the life of all beings, and I am the penance of the ascetics.

Chapter 7, Verse 10
O Arjuna, know Me to be the eternal seed of all beings. I am the intelligence of the intelligent, and the prowess of the powerful.

Chapter 7, Verse 11
Of the strong, I am the strength free from desire and attachment. I am desire that is not contrary to dharma, O best of the Bharatas.

Chapter 7, Verse 12
All states of being—goodness, passion, and ignorance—are manifested by My energy. I am, in one sense, everything, but I am independent. I am not under the modes of material nature.

Chapter 7, Verse 13
Deluded by the three modes (gunas) of nature, the world does not know Me, who am beyond these modes and inexhaustible.

Chapter 7, Verse 14
This divine energy of Mine, consisting of the three modes of material nature, is difficult to overcome. But those who surrender unto Me can easily cross beyond it.

Chapter 7, Verse 15
The foolish, the lowest among men, those whose knowledge is stolen by illusion, and who partake of the demonic nature—such persons do not surrender unto Me.

Chapter 7, Verse 16
Four kinds of virtuous people worship Me, O Arjuna: the distressed, the seeker of knowledge, the seeker of wealth, and the one who has attained knowledge.

Chapter 7, Verse 17
Of these, the wise one who is in full knowledge and always engaged in devotional service is the best. I am very dear to him, and he is dear to Me.

Chapter 7, Verse 18
All these devotees are certainly magnanimous souls, but he who is situated in knowledge of Me, I consider to be My very self.

Chapter 7, Verse 19
After many births and deaths, one who is truly wise surrenders unto Me, knowing Me to be the cause of all causes and all that is. Such a great soul is very rare.

Chapter 7, Verse 20
Those whose intelligence has been stolen by desires worship other deities, following particular rules and rituals, compelled by their own natures.

Chapter 7, Verse 21
Whatever form a devotee desires to worship with faith, I make that faith steady so that he can devote himself to that form.

Chapter 7, Verse 22
Endowed with such faith, he seeks the blessings of that deity and obtains his desires; but in reality, these benefits are given by Me alone.

Chapter 7, Verse 23
But the fruits gained by those of small understanding are temporary. Those who worship the demigods go to them, while My devotees come to Me.

Chapter 7, Verse 24
The unintelligent think that I, the unmanifest, have become visible. They do not understand My higher nature, which is eternal and supreme.

Chapter 7, Verse 25
I am never manifest to the foolish and unintelligent. For them, I am covered by My internal potency, and they do not know that I am unborn and infallible.

Chapter 7, Verse 26
O Arjuna, I know everything that has happened in the past, everything that is happening in the present, and all that will happen in the future. But Me no one knows.

Chapter 7, Verse 27
O scion of Bharata, all living beings are born into delusion, overcome by desire and hatred since birth.

Chapter 7, Verse 28
But persons who have acted piously in previous lives, and whose sins are completely eradicated, engage in My devotional service with determination.

Chapter 7, Verse 29
Those who strive for liberation from old age and death take refuge in Me. They fully know Brahman, the individual self, and all actions.

Chapter 7, Verse 30
Those who know Me as the Supreme Lord of all worlds, as the enjoyer of sacrifices and austerities, and as the controller of all beings, understand Me even at the time of death.

Chapter 8, Verse 1
Arjuna said: O Supreme Person, what is Brahman? What is the self? What are actions, O Supreme Being? What is material manifestation, and what are the demigods? Please explain this to me.

Chapter 8, Verse 2
Who is the Lord of sacrifice, and how does He reside in the body, O Madhusudana? And how can those engaged in devotion know You at the time of death?

Chapter 8, Verse 3
The Blessed Lord said: The indestructible, transcendental living entity is called Brahman, and his eternal nature is called the self. Action, pertaining to the development of material bodies, is called karma.

Chapter 8, Verse 4
O best of the embodied beings, the physical nature is known to be perishable, and the living entity is called the enjoyer in the body. The Supreme Lord is the controller of all, residing in the body as the overseer.

Chapter 8, Verse 5
And whoever, at the time of death, quits his body remembering Me alone, at once attains My nature. Of this there is no doubt.

Chapter 8, Verse 6
Whatever state of being one remembers when he quits his body, that state he will attain without fail.

Chapter 8, Verse 7
Therefore, Arjuna, you should always think of Me and at the same time perform your prescribed duty. With your mind and intellect fixed on Me, you will certainly come to Me.

Chapter 8, Verse 8
He who meditates on the Supreme Person with a mind constantly engaged in remembering Me, undeviated by other thoughts, is sure to reach Me.

Chapter 8, Verse 9
One should meditate on the Supreme Person as the one who knows everything, as the oldest, the controller, smaller than the smallest, the maintainer of everything, beyond material conception, inconceivable, and eternal.

Chapter 8, Verse 10
At the time of death, with an unshaken mind, devotion, and the strength of yoga, one fixes the life air between the eyebrows and attains the Supreme Person.

Chapter 8, Verse 11
I shall now explain to you that path which the yogis take to achieve liberation—entering the Brahman, which is eternal and beyond all dualities.

Chapter 8, Verse 12
One who shuts all the doors of the senses, fixes the mind on the heart, and draws the life air to the top of the head by the power of yoga,

Chapter 8, Verse 13
Chanting the sacred syllable Om, the supreme combination of letters, and leaving the body, one who thinks of Me reaches the supreme goal.

Chapter 8, Verse 14
For one who always remembers Me without deviation, I am easy to obtain, O son of Pritha, because of his constant devotion.

Chapter 8, Verse 15
After attaining Me, great souls do not take birth again in this temporary world of misery, because they have reached the highest perfection.

Chapter 8, Verse 16
From the highest planet in the material world down to the lowest, all are places of misery where repeated birth and death occur. But one who reaches My abode never takes birth again.

Chapter 8, Verse 17
By human calculation, a thousand ages taken together form the duration of Brahma’s one day. And such also is the duration of his night.

Chapter 8, Verse 18
At the beginning of Brahma’s day, all living beings come into existence; and at night, they are annihilated.

Chapter 8, Verse 19
Again and again, when Brahma’s day arrives, all living entities come into being, and with the arrival of Brahma’s night, they are helplessly annihilated.

Chapter 8, Verse 20
Yet there is another unmanifest nature, which is eternal and is beyond the manifested and unmanifested. It is supreme and never annihilated.

Chapter 8, Verse 21
That which the Vedantists describe as unmanifest and imperishable—that is the supreme destination. Those who reach it never return. That is My supreme abode.

Chapter 8, Verse 22
O son of Pritha, that Supreme Person is to be attained by unalloyed devotion. In Him all living beings reside, and by Him everything is pervaded.

Chapter 8, Verse 23
O best of the Bharatas, I shall now explain to you the different times at which departing, the yogi either returns or does not return.

Chapter 8, Verse 24
Those who know the Supreme Brahman and depart during the time of fire, in light, at an auspicious moment, during the waxing moon, or the six months of the sun’s northern course, attain the Supreme.

Chapter 8, Verse 25
Those who depart during the smoke, night, the waning moon, or the six months of the southern course of the sun reach the lunar light and return again.

Chapter 8, Verse 26
According to the Vedas, there are two paths—one of light and one of darkness. The one who travels by light does not return; the one who travels by darkness returns.

Chapter 8, Verse 27
O Arjuna, knowing these two paths, the yogi is never bewildered. Therefore, be steadfast in devotion at all times.

Chapter 8, Verse 28
A person who knows the results of both the paths transcends them. Being a devotee, he attains the supreme abode and surpasses all results of Vedic study, sacrifices, austerities, and charities.

Chapter 9, Verse 1
The Blessed Lord said: I shall now declare to you, who do not disbelieve, the most confidential knowledge and realization, knowing which you shall be liberated from all miseries of material existence.

Chapter 9, Verse 2
This knowledge is the king of education, the most secret of all secrets. It is the purest knowledge, and because it gives direct perception of the self by realization, it is the perfection of religion. It is everlasting and joyfully performed.

Chapter 9, Verse 3
Those who are not faithful on the path of devotion cannot attain Me, O conqueror of foes. They return to the path of birth and death in this material world.

Chapter 9, Verse 4
By Me, in My unmanifested form, this entire universe is pervaded. All beings are in Me, but I am not in them.

Chapter 9, Verse 5
And yet, everything that is created does not rest in Me. Behold My divine mystery! Although I am the maintainer of all living entities, and although I am everywhere, still My Self is the very source of creation.

Chapter 9, Verse 6
As the mighty wind, blowing everywhere, always rests in space, know that similarly, all beings rest in Me.

Chapter 9, Verse 7
O son of Kunti, at the end of the millennium all material manifestations enter into My nature, and at the beginning of another millennium, by My potency, I create them again.

Chapter 9, Verse 8
The whole cosmic order is under Me. By My will it is manifested again and again, and by My will it is annihilated at the end.

Chapter 9, Verse 9
O Dhananjaya, these actions do not bind Me. I remain like one unconcerned and unattached to those actions.

Chapter 9, Verse 10
This material nature, which is one of My energies, is working under My direction, producing all moving and non-moving beings. By its rule this manifestation is created and annihilated again and again.

Chapter 9, Verse 11
Fools deride Me when I descend in the human form. They do not know My transcendental nature as the Supreme Lord of all that be.

Chapter 9, Verse 12
Those who are thus bewildered are attracted by demonic and atheistic views. In that deluded condition, their hopes for liberation, their fruitive activities, and their culture of knowledge are all defeated.

Chapter 9, Verse 13
But the great souls, who are not deluded, are under the protection of the divine nature. They are fully engaged in devotional service because they know Me as the Supreme Lord, original and inexhaustible.

Chapter 9, Verse 14
Always chanting My glories, endeavoring with great determination, bowing down to Me, these great souls perpetually worship Me with devotion.

Chapter 9, Verse 15
Others, who engage in the sacrifice of knowledge, worship the Supreme as one without a second, as diverse in many, and in the universal form.

Chapter 9, Verse 16
But it is I who am the ritual, the sacrifice, the offering to the ancestors, the healing herb, the transcendental chant. I am the butter and the fire and the offering.

Chapter 9, Verse 17
I am the father of this universe, the mother, the support, and the grandsire. I am the object of knowledge, the purifier, and the syllable Om. I am also the Rig, Sama, and Yajur Vedas.

Chapter 9, Verse 18
I am the goal, the sustainer, the master, the witness, the abode, the refuge, and the most dear friend. I am the creation and the annihilation, the basis of everything, the resting place, and the eternal seed.

Chapter 9, Verse 19
I give heat. I withhold and send forth the rain. I am immortality and also death. I am both the spirit and matter, O Arjuna.

Chapter 9, Verse 20
Those who study the Vedas and drink the soma juice, seeking the heavenly planets, worship Me indirectly. Purified of sin, they take birth on the pious heavenly planet of Indra, where they enjoy godly delights.

Chapter 9, Verse 21
When they have thus enjoyed heavenly sense pleasure, they return to this mortal planet again. Thus, through the Vedic principles, they achieve only flickering happiness.

Chapter 9, Verse 22
But those who always worship Me with exclusive devotion, meditating on My transcendental form—to them I carry what they lack, and I preserve what they have.

Chapter 9, Verse 23
Even those who are devotees of other gods and who worship them with faith actually worship only Me, O son of Kunti, but they do so in a wrong way.

Chapter 9, Verse 24
I am the only enjoyer and master of all sacrifices. Therefore, those who do not recognize My true nature fall down.

Chapter 9, Verse 25
Those who worship the demigods go to the demigods, those who worship ancestors go to the ancestors, those who worship ghosts and spirits go to them, and those who worship Me will live with Me.

Chapter 9, Verse 26
If one offers Me with love and devotion a leaf, a flower, fruit, or water, I will accept it.

Chapter 9, Verse 27
Whatever you do, whatever you eat, whatever you offer or give away, and whatever austerity you perform—do that, O son of Kunti, as an offering to Me.

Chapter 9, Verse 28
In this way, you will be freed from bondage to work and its auspicious and inauspicious results. With your mind fixed on Me in this principle of renunciation, you will be liberated and come to Me.

Chapter 9, Verse 29
I envy no one, nor am I partial to anyone. I am equal to all. But whoever renders service unto Me in devotion is a friend, is in Me, and I am also a friend to him.

Chapter 9, Verse 30
Even if one commits the most abominable actions, if he is engaged in devotional service, he is to be considered saintly because he is properly situated in his determination.

Chapter 9, Verse 31
He quickly becomes righteous and attains lasting peace. O son of Kunti, declare it boldly that My devotee never perishes.

Chapter 9, Verse 32
O son of Pritha, those who take shelter in Me, though they be of lower birth—women, Vaishyas, as well as Shudras—can attain the supreme destination.

Chapter 9, Verse 33
How much more so the righteous Brahmanas and the devoted royal sages. Therefore, having come to this temporary, miserable world, engage in My loving service.

Chapter 9, Verse 34
Always think of Me, become My devotee, worship Me, and offer your homage unto Me. Thus you will come to Me without fail. I promise you this because you are My very dear friend.

Chapter 10, Verse 1
The Blessed Lord said: Listen again, O mighty-armed Arjuna. Because you are dear to Me, I shall speak to you further, imparting knowledge that is supreme.

Chapter 10, Verse 2
Neither the hosts of gods nor the great sages know My origin, for I am the source of all the gods and sages.

Chapter 10, Verse 3
He who knows Me as unborn, without beginning, and as the Supreme Lord of the worlds—he, undeluded among mortals, is freed from all sins.

Chapter 10, Verse 4,5
Spiritual intelligence, knowledge, freedom from false perception, compassion, truthfulness, control of the senses, control of the mind, happieness, unhappiness, birth, death, fear and fearlessness, nonviolence, equanimity, contentment, austerity, charity, fame, infamy; all these varieagated diverse qualities of all living entities originate from Me alone.

Chapter 10, Verse 6
The seven great sages and the four ancient Manus, from whom all the creatures of the world have descended, were born from My mind and come forth from Me.

Chapter 10, Verse 7
One who truly understands My divine glories and powers is united with Me through unwavering devotion—of this there is no doubt.

Chapter 10, Verse 8
I am the source of all creation. Everything proceeds from Me. The wise, who know this, worship Me with loving devotion.

Chapter 10, Verse 9
Their thoughts are always on Me, their lives surrendered to Me, they derive satisfaction and bliss from enlightening one another and conversing about Me.

Chapter 10, Verse 10
To those who are constantly devoted and who worship Me with love, I give the understanding by which they can come to Me.

Chapter 10, Verse 11
Out of compassion for them, I, dwelling within their hearts, destroy the darkness born of ignorance with the shining lamp of knowledge.

Chapter 10, Verse 12–13
Arjuna said: You are the Supreme Brahman, the Supreme Light, the Supreme Purifier. All the sages proclaim You as the eternal, divine Person, the original God, unborn and all-pervading.

Chapter 10, Verse 14
All that You have said to me, O Krishna, I accept as truth. Neither the gods nor demons comprehend Your true nature.

Chapter 10, Verse 15
Indeed, only You know Yourself, by Yourself, O Supreme Person, origin of all beings, Lord of all beings, God of gods, and Master of the universe!

Chapter 10, Verse 16
Please tell me in detail of Your divine manifestations, by which You pervade all these worlds.

Chapter 10, Verse 17
O Krishna, how should I meditate on You? In what forms should I think of You, O Lord?

Chapter 10, Verse 18
Tell me again in detail of Your power and glory, for I am never satisfied in hearing Your nectar-like words.

Chapter 10, Verse 19
The Blessed Lord said: I shall now declare to you My divine glories, O best of the Kurus. There is no end to My manifestations, but I will tell you the most prominent ones.

Chapter 10, Verse 20
I am the Self, O Arjuna, seated in the hearts of all creatures. I am the beginning, the middle, and the end of all beings.

Chapter 10, Verse 21
Of the Adityas, I am Vishnu; of lights, I am the radiant sun; of the Maruts, I am Marichi; among the stars, I am the moon.

Chapter 10, Verse 22
Of the Vedas, I am the Sama Veda; of the gods, I am Indra; of the senses, I am the mind; and in living beings, I am consciousness.

Chapter 10, Verse 23
Of the Rudras, I am Shiva; of the Yakshas and Rakshasas, I am the lord of wealth, Kubera; of the Vasus, I am Agni; and of mountains, I am Meru.

Chapter 10, Verse 24
Of priests, O Arjuna, know Me as the chief, Brihaspati; of generals, I am Skanda; of bodies of water, I am the ocean.

Chapter 10, Verse 25
Of the great sages, I am Bhrigu; of words, I am the sacred syllable Om; of sacrifices, I am japa (chanting); and of immovable things, I am the Himalayas.

Chapter 10, Verse 26
Of all trees, I am the banyan; of sages among the gods, I am Narada; of Gandharvas, I am Chitraratha; among perfected beings, I am the sage Kapila.

Chapter 10, Verse 27
Of horses, know Me to be Uchchaihshravas, born of the nectar of immortality; of lordly elephants, I am Airavata; and of men, I am the king.

Chapter 10, Verse 28
Of weapons, I am the thunderbolt; among cows, I am the wish-fulfilling cow; of causes for procreation, I am Kandarpa, the god of love; and of serpents, I am Vasuki.

Chapter 10, Verse 29
Of the many-hooded Nāgas, I am Ananta; among aquatic beings, I am Varuna; among ancestors, I am Aryama; and among controllers, I am Yama, the lord of death.

Chapter 10, Verse 30
Among the Daityas, I am Prahlada; among calculators, I am time; among beasts, I am the lion; and among birds, I am Garuda.

Chapter 10, Verse 31
Among purifiers, I am the wind; among wielders of weapons, I am Rama; among fish, I am the shark; and among flowing rivers, I am the Ganga.

Chapter 10, Verse 32
Of all creations, I am the beginning and the end and also the middle. O Arjuna, of all sciences, I am the science of the self, and among logicians, I am the correct reasoning.

Chapter 10, Verse 33
Of letters, I am the letter A, and among compound words, I am the dual word. I am inexhaustible time, and I am the Creator who faces all directions.

Chapter 10, Verse 34
I am death that carries off all things, and I am the origin of all that shall be. Among women, I am fame, prosperity, speech, memory, intelligence, faithfulness, and patience.

Chapter 10, Verse 35
Of hymns, I am the Brihat Sāma sung to the Lord; of poetic meters, I am the Gayatri; of months, I am Margashirsha; and of seasons, I am spring.

Chapter 10, Verse 36
I am the gambling of the cheats, the splendor of the splendid, the victory of the victorious, and the resolve of those who are resolute.

Chapter 10, Verse 37
Among the Vrishnis, I am Vasudeva; among the Pandavas, I am Arjuna; among sages, I am Vyasa; and among poets, I am Ushanas.

Chapter 10, Verse 38
Among punishers, I am the rod of discipline; among those who seek victory, I am morality; among secrets, I am silence; and among the wise, I am wisdom.

Chapter 10, Verse 39
I am the seed of all beings. There is no being—moving or nonmoving—that can exist without Me.

Chapter 10, Verse 40
O Arjuna, there is no end to My divine manifestations. I have merely spoken of the most prominent of My divine glories.

Chapter 10, Verse 41
Whatever is glorious, prosperous, or powerful, know that it arises from a fragment of My splendor.

Chapter 10, Verse 42
But what need is there for all this detailed knowledge, O Arjuna? With a single fragment of Myself, I pervade and support this entire universe.

Chapter 11, Verse 1
Arjuna said: By Your mercy, I have heard this supreme secret concerning the Self, which You have spoken for my benefit.

Chapter 11, Verse 2
O lotus-eyed one, I have heard in detail from You about the origin and dissolution of beings, and also Your eternal greatness.

Chapter 11, Verse 3
O Supreme Lord, You have spoken about Yourself, but I desire to see Your divine form.

Chapter 11, Verse 4
If You think I am capable of seeing it, O Lord of all yoga, then show me Your eternal form.

Chapter 11, Verse 5
The Blessed Lord said: Behold, O Arjuna, My hundreds and thousands of divine forms, of various colors and shapes.

Chapter 11, Verse 6
Behold the Adityas, Vasus, Rudras, Ashvins, and Maruts. Behold many wonders never seen before, O Arjuna.

Chapter 11, Verse 7
Behold now the whole universe, moving and non-moving, gathered together in My body, O Arjuna, and also whatever else you desire to see.

Chapter 11, Verse 8
But you cannot see Me with your physical eyes; therefore, I grant you divine eyes. Behold My majestic yoga.

Chapter 11, Verse 9
Sanjaya said: Having spoken thus, the great Lord of yoga, Shri Krishna, revealed His supreme form to Arjuna.

Chapter 11, Verse 10–11
With many mouths and eyes, with many wondrous aspects, with many divine ornaments and weapons raised—He appeared with celestial garlands and garments, anointed with heavenly fragrances, full of wonders, shining in all directions.

Chapter 11, Verse 12
If a thousand suns were to rise in the sky at once, it might resemble the splendor of that exalted being.

Chapter 11, Verse 13
There, in the body of the God of gods, Arjuna saw the entire universe, divided into many, but united in one.

Chapter 11, Verse 14
Filled with awe and wonder, Arjuna, with his hair standing on end, bowed his head and spoke with folded hands.

Chapter 11, Verse 15
Arjuna said: O Lord, I see all the gods in Your body, as well as various beings, Brahma on His lotus seat, all the sages and the celestial serpents.

Chapter 11, Verse 16
I see You with infinite arms, bellies, mouths, and eyes—everywhere without limit. I see no beginning, middle, or end in You, O Lord of the universe.

Chapter 11, Verse 17
I see You crowned, armed with a mace and discus, glowing like a blazing fire or the sun, dazzling in all directions.

Chapter 11, Verse 18
You are the supreme imperishable, the ultimate resting place of all, the protector of eternal dharma, and the eternal divine being.

Chapter 11, Verse 19
You are without beginning, middle, or end, infinite in power, with countless arms; the sun and the moon are Your eyes, and fire is Your mouth, scorching the universe with Your radiance.

Chapter 11, Verse 20
The space between heaven and earth, and all the directions, are pervaded by You alone. Seeing this marvelous and terrible form, the three worlds tremble in fear.

Chapter 11, Verse 21
All the hosts of gods enter into You; some in fear praise You with folded hands; great sages and perfected beings glorify You with hymns.

Chapter 11, Verse 22
The Rudras, Adityas, Vasus, Sadhyas, Vishvadevas, Ashvins, Maruts, ancestors, Gandharvas, Yakshas, Asuras, and Siddhas—all gaze upon You in amazement.

Chapter 11, Verse 23
O mighty-armed one, seeing Your great form with many mouths, eyes, arms, thighs, and feet, with many stomachs and terrible teeth, the worlds are terrified, and so am I.

Chapter 11, Verse 24
Seeing You touching the sky, glowing with many colors, with gaping mouths and large blazing eyes, my heart trembles and I lose all courage and peace.

Chapter 11, Verse 25
Seeing Your terrible mouths, with fearful teeth, I cannot maintain my composure. All directions lose their meaning for me. O Lord of lords, please be gracious!

Chapter 11, Verse 26–27
All the sons of Dhritarashtra, along with multitudes of kings, Bhishma, Drona, Karna, and the chief warriors of our side too—are all rushing into Your fearsome mouths, with terrible teeth. Some are caught between Your teeth, with heads being crushed.

Chapter 11, Verse 28
As many waves of rivers rush toward the ocean, so do these heroes rush into Your blazing mouths.

Chapter 11, Verse 29
As moths rush into a blazing fire to perish, so too do these beings rush into Your mouths, only to be destroyed.

Chapter 11, Verse 30
You devour all the worlds with Your flaming mouths. You lick them up with blazing tongues. Your fierce radiance fills the universe, burning everything.

Chapter 11, Verse 31
Tell me, who are You in this terrifying form? O Lord of gods, be gracious! I wish to know You as You truly are, for I do not comprehend Your purpose.

Chapter 11, Verse 32
The Blessed Lord said: I am Time, the great destroyer of the worlds, and I have come here to destroy all people. Except for you, all the soldiers here on both sides will be slain.

Chapter 11, Verse 33
Therefore, rise up and attain glory! Conquer your enemies and enjoy a prosperous kingdom. I have already slain them; you are but My instrument, O Arjuna.

Chapter 11, Verse 34
Drona, Bhishma, Jayadratha, Karna, and others have already been killed by Me. You fight and do not fear. You will conquer your enemies.

Chapter 11, Verse 35
Sanjaya said: Hearing these words of Krishna, Arjuna trembled with joined palms, bowed down, and with great fear, spoke to Krishna in a faltering voice.

Chapter 11, Verse 36
Arjuna said: Rightly do the world rejoice and glorify You, O Krishna. The demons flee in fear, and the hosts of saints bow to You.

Chapter 11, Verse 37
Why should they not bow to You, O Great One? You are greater than Brahma. You are the primal cause. You are the infinite, the abode of the universe, the imperishable and the being beyond both.

Chapter 11, Verse 38
You are the primal God, the ancient Purusha. You are the supreme refuge of the universe, the knower and the knowable, and the highest abode. The whole universe is pervaded by You, O infinite form.

Chapter 11, Verse 39
You are the wind, death, fire, water, moon, and the creator. I bow to You a thousand times, and again and again I bow to You.

Chapter 11, Verse 40
Salutations to You from front, behind, and all sides! O all-powerful One, You are infinite in strength and boundless in valor. You pervade everything and are everything!

Chapter 11, Verse 41–42
Whatever I have said rashly, thinking of You as my friend—calling You Krishna, Yadava, or my companion—out of carelessness or love, not knowing Your greatness, and in jest—while eating, resting, sitting, or playing—alone or in company—for all that, I beg forgiveness, O incomprehensible Lord!

Chapter 11, Verse 43
You are the father of the world, the animate and inanimate. You are the object of reverence, the most worthy of worship. There is none equal to You in the three worlds.

Chapter 11, Verse 44
Therefore, bowing down and prostrating before You, I seek Your mercy. As a father forgives a son, a friend a friend, a lover his beloved—please forgive me, O Lord.

Chapter 11, Verse 45
I am overjoyed to have seen what was never seen before, yet my heart is troubled with fear. Please, O God of gods, show me Your gentle form.

Chapter 11, Verse 46
I desire to see You in Your four-armed form, with a crown, holding a mace and a discus. O Lord of a thousand arms, please appear in that form again.

Chapter 11, Verse 47
The Blessed Lord said: Out of My grace, I have shown you this supreme form, radiant, universal, infinite, and primal, which none before you has ever seen.

Chapter 11, Verse 48
Neither through the Vedas, nor through austerities, nor through charity or sacrifice, can I be seen in this form in the world of men, as you have seen Me.

Chapter 11, Verse 49
Do not be afraid or bewildered by seeing this terrible form. Be free from fear, and now behold My previous form again.

Chapter 11, Verse 50
Sanjaya said: Having spoken thus, Krishna appeared in His gentle form again and comforted the terrified Arjuna.

Chapter 11, Verse 51
Arjuna said: O Janardana, seeing this gentle human form of Yours, I am now calm and restored to my own nature.

Chapter 11, Verse 52
The Blessed Lord said: Very difficult it is to behold this form of Mine which you have seen; even the gods always long to see it.

Chapter 11, Verse 53
Neither by study of the Vedas, nor by austerity, charity, or sacrifice can I be seen in this form as you have seen Me.

Chapter 11, Verse 54
But by undivided devotion alone, I can be truly known, seen, and entered into, O Arjuna.

Chapter 11, Verse 55
He who performs all duties for Me, who considers Me the supreme goal, who is devoted to Me, free from attachment and enmity toward all beings—he truly comes to Me, O Pandava.

Chapter 12, Verse 1
Arjuna said: Those devotees who always worship You with devotion, and those who worship the formless—who among them is better versed in yoga?

Chapter 12, Verse 2
The Blessed Lord said: Those who fix their minds on Me and worship Me always with steadfast faith, I consider them to be the most perfect in yoga.

Chapter 12, Verse 3
But those who worship the imperishable, the indefinable, the unmanifest, the all-pervading, the unthinkable, the unchangeable, the immovable, and the eternal—

Chapter 12, Verse 4
—controlling all their senses, being even-minded everywhere, engaged in the welfare of all beings—indeed, they too attain Me.

Chapter 12, Verse 5
But the difficulty of those whose minds are set on the unmanifest is greater; for the path of the unmanifest is hard for embodied beings.

Chapter 12, Verse 6
But those who worship Me, renouncing all actions in Me, considering Me as the supreme goal, meditating on Me with exclusive devotion—

Chapter 12, Verse 7
—for them, whose minds are set on Me, I swiftly deliver them from the ocean of birth and death, O Arjuna.

Chapter 12, Verse 8
Fix your mind on Me alone, place your intellect in Me; then surely you will live in Me hereafter.

Chapter 12, Verse 9
If you cannot fix your mind steadily on Me, then strive to attain Me through regular practice (abhyasa yoga), O Arjuna.

Chapter 12, Verse 10
If you are unable even to practice, then be intent on working for Me. Even by performing actions for My sake, you will attain perfection.

Chapter 12, Verse 11
If you cannot do even this, then take refuge in devotion by renouncing the fruits of all actions and acting with self-control.

Chapter 12, Verse 12
Better indeed is knowledge than mere practice; better than knowledge is meditation; better than meditation is renunciation of the fruits of action—peace immediately follows renunciation.

Chapter 12, Verse 13
He who has no hatred for any being, who is friendly and compassionate, who is free from ego, and from ownership, who is patient and content—

Chapter 12, Verse 14
—who has a firm resolve, whose mind and intellect are fixed on Me, who is devoted to Me—such a devotee is dear to Me.

Chapter 12, Verse 15
He by whom the world is not agitated, and who is not agitated by the world, who is free from joy, envy, fear, and anxiety—he is dear to Me.

Chapter 12, Verse 16
He who is free from wants, pure, expert, impartial, and free from anxiety, who renounces all undertakings—such a devotee is dear to Me.

Chapter 12, Verse 17
He who neither rejoices nor hates, neither grieves nor desires, who has renounced both good and evil, and is full of devotion—he is dear to Me.

Chapter 12, Verse 18
He who is the same toward friend and enemy, in honor and dishonor, in cold and heat, in pleasure and pain, who is free from attachment—

Chapter 12, Verse 19
—who is indifferent to praise and blame, silent, content with whatever comes, unattached to any place or situation, with a steady mind, full of devotion—such a devotee is dear to Me.

Chapter 12, Verse 20
But those devotees who follow this immortal path of devotion, who have faith, and who regard Me as the supreme goal—they are exceedingly dear to Me.

Chapter 13, Verse 1
Arjuna said: O Krishna, I desire to understand Prakriti (nature) and Purusha (the spirit), the field and the knower of the field, and also knowledge and that which is to be known.

Chapter 13, Verse 2
The Blessed Lord said: O Arjuna, this body is called the "field," and he who knows it is called the "knower of the field" by the wise.

Chapter 13, Verse 3
Know Me also as the knower of the field in all fields, O Arjuna. Understanding the field and the knower of the field is true knowledge.

Chapter 13, Verse 4
Now hear from Me briefly what the field is, what it is like, what its transformations are, and from where it originates, and also what he is and what his powers are.

Chapter 13, Verse 5
Great sages have sung of this in various ways, in different Vedic hymns, and also in well-reasoned and conclusive texts on Brahman.

Chapter 13, Verse 6
The field includes the five great elements, ego, intellect, the unmanifest, the ten senses, the mind, and the five sense objects,

Chapter 13, Verse 7
Desire, hatred, pleasure, pain, the aggregate (the body), intelligence, and firmness—this is the field briefly described with its modifications.

Chapter 13, Verse 8
Humility, non-pretentiousness, non-violence, forgiveness, uprightness, service to the teacher, purity, steadiness, and self-control—

Chapter 13, Verse 9
—dispassion towards sense objects, absence of ego, perception of the evil in birth, death, old age, disease, and pain;

Chapter 13, Verse 10
—non-attachment, non-identification with son, wife, home, and so on, and constant even-mindedness in desired and undesired events;

Chapter 13, Verse 11
—unwavering devotion to Me with exclusive Yoga, resorting to solitary places, disinterest in the company of people;

Chapter 13, Verse 12
—constancy in knowledge, perception of the goal of true knowledge: all this is declared to be knowledge, and what is contrary to it is ignorance.

Chapter 13, Verse 13
Now I shall declare what is to be known, by knowing which one attains immortality: that is beginningless, the supreme Brahman, called neither being nor non-being.

Chapter 13, Verse 14
It has hands and feet everywhere, eyes, heads, and mouths everywhere, and ears everywhere. It pervades everything in the universe.

Chapter 13, Verse 15
Shining by the functions of all the senses, yet free from all senses; unattached, yet supporting all; without qualities, yet the experiencer of qualities.

Chapter 13, Verse 16
Outside and inside all beings, the unmoving and the moving; because of its subtlety, it is incomprehensible; and it is far and near.

Chapter 13, Verse 17
Undivided, yet existing as if divided in beings; that is to be known as the sustainer of beings, their absorber and creator as well.

Chapter 13, Verse 18
That light of all lights is said to be beyond darkness; it is knowledge, the object of knowledge, and attainable through knowledge. It is situated in the heart of all.

Chapter 13, Verse 19
Thus the field, knowledge, and the object of knowledge have been briefly stated. Knowing this, My devotee becomes fit for My nature.

Chapter 13, Verse 20
Know that both Prakriti and Purusha are beginningless; and know also that all modifications and qualities arise from Prakriti.

Chapter 13, Verse 21
Prakriti is said to be the cause of the body and the senses; Purusha is said to be the cause of experiencing pleasure and pain.

Chapter 13, Verse 22
The Purusha residing in this body experiences the qualities born of Prakriti. Attachment to the qualities is the cause of birth in good and evil wombs.

Chapter 13, Verse 23
The Supreme Purusha in this body is called the witness, the consenter, the supporter, the enjoyer, the great Lord, and the Supreme Self.

Chapter 13, Verse 24
He who knows the Purusha and Prakriti with its qualities, in whatever state he may be, he shall never be born again.

Chapter 13, Verse 25
Some perceive the Self in the self by meditation, others by the Yoga of knowledge, and others by the Yoga of action.

Chapter 13, Verse 26
Still others, not knowing thus, worship by hearing from others; they too cross beyond death, solely by their devotion to what they have heard.

Chapter 13, Verse 27
Whatever is born, animate or inanimate, know it to be from the union of the field and the knower of the field, O Arjuna.

Chapter 13, Verse 28
He who sees the Supreme Lord equally existing in all beings, the imperishable in the perishable, truly sees.

Chapter 13, Verse 29
Seeing the same Lord equally present everywhere, he does not hurt the Self by the self, and thus attains the supreme goal.

Chapter 13, Verse 30
He who sees all actions as performed by Prakriti alone, and the Self as non-doer, truly sees.

Chapter 13, Verse 31
When a man sees the diversity of beings as resting in One, and spreading out from it, then he attains Brahman.

Chapter 13, Verse 32
That indestructible Supreme Self, being without beginning and without qualities, though dwelling in the body, does not act, nor is it tainted.

Chapter 13, Verse 33
As the all-pervading space is not tainted because of its subtlety, so the Self, though present in every body, is not tainted.

Chapter 13, Verse 34
As the one sun illumines the entire world, so the Lord of the field illumines the entire field, O Arjuna.

Chapter 13, Verse 35
Those who, with the eye of knowledge, perceive the difference between the field and the knower of the field, and the liberation of beings from Prakriti, they attain the Supreme.

Chapter 14, Verse 1
The Blessed Lord said: I shall again declare the supreme knowledge, the best of all knowledge, knowing which all the sages have attained the highest perfection.

Chapter 14, Verse 2
Resorting to this knowledge and having attained My state, they are not born at the time of creation, nor are they disturbed at the time of dissolution.

Chapter 14, Verse 3
The total material substance, called Brahman, is the womb. In that I place the seed, and from that, O Arjuna, the birth of all beings takes place.

Chapter 14, Verse 4
Whatever forms are produced in all the wombs, O son of Kunti, the great Brahman is their womb, and I am the seed-giving father.

Chapter 14, Verse 5
Sattva (goodness), Rajas (passion), and Tamas (ignorance)—these gunas, born of nature, bind the imperishable soul to the body, O mighty-armed one.

Chapter 14, Verse 6
Of these, Sattva, being pure, illuminating and free from disease, binds by attachment to happiness and knowledge, O sinless one.

Chapter 14, Verse 7
Rajas is of the nature of passion, arising from thirst and attachment; it binds the soul by attachment to action, O son of Kunti.

Chapter 14, Verse 8
But Tamas, born of ignorance, deludes all embodied beings. It binds through negligence, laziness, and sleep, O Arjuna.

Chapter 14, Verse 9
Sattva attaches one to happiness, Rajas to action, and Tamas, verily, by covering knowledge, leads to negligence.

Chapter 14, Verse 10
O Arjuna, Sattva arises by overpowering Rajas and Tamas; Rajas arises by overpowering Sattva and Tamas; and Tamas arises by overpowering Sattva and Rajas.

Chapter 14, Verse 11
When the light of knowledge shines through all the gates of the body, then it may be known that Sattva is predominant.

Chapter 14, Verse 12
When greed, activity, undertaking of actions, restlessness, and desire arise, then Rajas is predominant.

Chapter 14, Verse 13
When darkness, inactivity, negligence, and delusion arise, then Tamas is predominant.

Chapter 14, Verse 14
If one dies when Sattva is dominant, then he attains the pure worlds of the knowers of the Supreme.

Chapter 14, Verse 15
Dying in Rajas, he is born among those attached to action; dying in Tamas, he is born in the wombs of the deluded.

Chapter 14, Verse 16
The fruit of good action is said to be pure and Sattvic; the fruit of Rajas is pain, and ignorance is the fruit of Tamas.

Chapter 14, Verse 17
From Sattva arises knowledge; from Rajas, greed arises; and from Tamas arise negligence, delusion, and ignorance.

Chapter 14, Verse 18
Those established in Sattva rise upwards; those in Rajas remain in the middle; while those in Tamas, engaged in the lowest activities, sink downwards.

Chapter 14, Verse 19
When the seer perceives no agent other than the gunas, and knows That which is higher than the gunas, he attains My being.

Chapter 14, Verse 20
Having gone beyond these three gunas, which form the body, the embodied one is freed from birth, death, old age, and sorrow, and attains immortality.

Chapter 14, Verse 21
Arjuna said: By what signs is he known who has gone beyond the three gunas, O Lord? What is his conduct, and how does he go beyond these three gunas?

Chapter 14, Verse 22
The Blessed Lord said: He who does not hate the appearance of light (Sattva), activity (Rajas), and delusion (Tamas), nor longs for them when they disappear;

Chapter 14, Verse 23
He who remains unattached, unmoved by the gunas, knowing that the gunas operate, and remains firm and undisturbed;

Chapter 14, Verse 24
He who is alike in pleasure and pain, who dwells in the Self, to whom a clod, a stone, and gold are alike, who is firm-minded, the same in praise and blame;

Chapter 14, Verse 25
The same in honor and dishonor, the same to friend and foe, abandoning all undertakings—he is said to have risen above the gunas.

Chapter 14, Verse 26
He who serves Me with unwavering devotion, transcends the gunas and is fit to become Brahman.

Chapter 14, Verse 27
For I am the abode of Brahman, the immortal and imperishable, of eternal Dharma and absolute bliss.

Chapter 15, Verse 1
The Blessed Lord said: There is an imperishable tree, the roots of which are above and the branches below; its leaves are the Vedic hymns. One who knows this tree is the knower of the Vedas.

Chapter 15, Verse 2
Its branches extend down and above, nourished by the three gunas. The roots of this tree are firmly fixed in the ground, and it is said to be eternal. It is the root of all creation.

Chapter 15, Verse 3
The real form of this tree cannot be perceived in this world. No one can understand where its end is or where its beginning and branches are. But the wise know that this is the eternal tree.

Chapter 15, Verse 4
By cutting this tree with the axe of detachment, one should seek the place from which, having departed, one never returns. There, one will find the Supreme Abode, the eternal, imperishable Brahman.

Chapter 15, Verse 5
That supreme reality, which is beyond the material world, is both within and beyond all beings. The one who realizes this supreme truth is liberated from the cycle of birth and death.

Chapter 15, Verse 6
Those who are free from pride and delusion, who have controlled their senses and attained self-realization, are freed from the bondage of birth and death and attain the Supreme Being.

Chapter 15, Verse 7
The divine essence within every living being is an eternal part of Me. Because of this, O Arjuna, all beings are bound to Me, and I am the ultimate cause of all creation.

Chapter 15, Verse 8
When the individual soul leaves this body and enters another, it carries with it the sense of ego, as the wind carries scents from their sources.

Chapter 15, Verse 9
The senses, mind, and intellect are the sources of all experiences. In this body, they create the illusion of separateness. But those who have transcended this illusion are able to perceive the true essence of life.

Chapter 15, Verse 10
Those who are attached to the material world are unable to perceive the self, even though it is within them. But those who are free from attachment can perceive the Supreme Self.

Chapter 15, Verse 11
The soul, which is present in all living beings, is never born, nor does it die. It is eternal and indestructible. When the body is destroyed, the soul remains.

Chapter 15, Verse 12
The light of the sun and moon, the power of fire, and the life force in all beings, are all part of My divine energy.

Chapter 15, Verse 13
The material nature creates and sustains the physical body, and the soul experiences both pleasure and pain within it. But the soul itself is beyond both pleasure and pain.

Chapter 15, Verse 14
I am the source of all the senses, and I am also the power that enables them to act. Without My energy, nothing in the material world would exist.

Chapter 15, Verse 15
Those who are able to transcend the material world, controlling their senses and intellect, are able to realize the eternal truth and attain liberation from the cycle of birth and death.

Chapter 15, Verse 16
There are two types of reality in this world: the perishable, which is the physical body, and the imperishable, which is the soul. The imperishable is beyond the reach of time, and it is indestructible.

Chapter 15, Verse 17
The Supreme Being is beyond the material creation, beyond both the perishable and imperishable realms. He is the Supreme Reality, the eternal, the unchanging, and the ultimate goal.

Chapter 15, Verse 18
The Supreme Divine Personality, who is beyond all creation, is the ultimate goal. He is the highest person, the eternal source, and He pervades all beings.

Chapter 15, Verse 19
The one who understands this truth—the eternal reality that is the Supreme Being—attains liberation. Having transcended the material world, they are no longer bound by birth and death.

Chapter 15, Verse 20
I have explained to you this knowledge of the Supreme Self. Whoever realizes this knowledge and worships the Supreme Being will attain liberation and be freed from the cycle of birth and death.

Chapter 16, Verse 1
The Blessed Lord said: Fearlessness, purity of heart, steadfastness in knowledge and yoga, generosity, self-restraint, and non-violence—these are the divine qualities, O Arjuna.

Chapter 16, Verse 2
Arrogance, pride, hypocrisy, harshness, and ignorance—these are the demoniacal qualities, O son of Pritha.

Chapter 16, Verse 3
The divine qualities lead one to liberation, while the demoniacal qualities lead to bondage. Do not grieve, for you are born with divine qualities, O son of Kunti.

Chapter 16, Verse 4
The demoniacal person does not know what to do or what not to do. Neither purity, nor good conduct, nor truth is found in them.

Chapter 16, Verse 5
They say that the world is unreal, without a god, and that there is nothing beyond the material body. Such deluded souls are caught in doubt and despair.

Chapter 16, Verse 6
These people, who are bound by their desires, perform actions to gratify their senses. They are consumed by their desires and are driven by selfish motives.

Chapter 16, Verse 7
Such people, being attached to worldly pleasures, do not recognize the higher truth. They reject self-control and disregard the divine path.

Chapter 16, Verse 8
In the pursuit of their desires, they accumulate wealth and perform sacrifices. They act with the sole aim of self-gratification, thinking they are independent of divine laws.

Chapter 16, Verse 9
They perform sacrifices for personal gain, without true knowledge or understanding, and are blind to their higher purpose.

Chapter 16, Verse 10
The demoniacal soul is always in pursuit of worldly pleasures, not caring for the welfare of others. They disregard the laws of dharma and live only for self-interest.

Chapter 16, Verse 11
The demoniacal souls are always filled with greed and desire. Their minds are deluded, and they indulge in actions that bring them suffering and sorrow.

Chapter 16, Verse 12
They think, "Today we have acquired such and such a thing; tomorrow we will do this and that." They are driven by ego and the desire to accumulate more wealth, without realizing the impermanence of material life.

Chapter 16, Verse 13
They are full of arrogance and disregard for others. They live with a sense of superiority and act in ways that harm others, accumulating negative karmas.

Chapter 16, Verse 14
"Driven by desire, we will fulfill all our goals. No one can stop us; we will enjoy the pleasures of the world forever."

Chapter 16, Verse 15
This is the delusion of the demoniacal soul. They are filled with arrogance and think they are invincible. They reject self-restraint and compassion.

Chapter 16, Verse 16
They are envious, malicious, and violent, and they engage in activities that are harmful to others. Their only goal is to attain self-gratification, ignoring the suffering they cause.

Chapter 16, Verse 17
They do not believe in any higher reality and instead live in ignorance, bound by their desires. They are deluded by their sense of self-importance and material pleasure.

Chapter 16, Verse 18
Such people, driven by lust, anger, and greed, destroy their own souls, deluding themselves with the illusion that they are free from all constraints.

Chapter 16, Verse 19
They will be reborn in hell, as they have lived lives of cruelty, violence, and selfishness. They face their own self-created destruction.

Chapter 16, Verse 20
The actions of these demoniacal individuals, filled with ego and desire, will lead them to hell, a place of endless suffering, where they will be bound by the consequences of their actions.

Chapter 16, Verse 21
The person who indulges in passion, anger, and greed shall be born into a lower existence, where their suffering will be greater. This is the fate of those who live according to the demoniacal qualities.

Chapter 16, Verse 22
But those who practice the divine qualities and live in accordance with the supreme truth will attain liberation, and their suffering will cease.

Chapter 16, Verse 23
Those who are free from pride, anger, and selfish desire, who follow the path of self-restraint, achieve peace and liberation. They are united with the Supreme Divine.

Chapter 16, Verse 24
Thus, the qualities of the divine and the demoniacal are clearly distinguished. Those who are righteous and practice the divine qualities are blessed, while those who follow the demoniacal path face destruction.

Chapter 17, Verse 1
Arjuna said: O Krishna, what is the nature of those who perform acts of worship, but not according to the scriptures? Are they in Sattva, Rajas, or Tamas?

Chapter 17, Verse 2
The Blessed Lord said: According to the three gunas, the faith of the embodied soul is of three kinds. It is in accordance with the nature of the individual; O Arjuna, hear how it is.

Chapter 17, Verse 3
Faith in the mode of Sattva is pure, and it is characterized by devotion to the Supreme Being, sincerity, and knowledge of the self.

Chapter 17, Verse 4
Those who are in the mode of Rajas, driven by desire and attachment, worship the gods of wealth and power. Their actions are motivated by selfishness.

Chapter 17, Verse 5
Those who are in the mode of Tamas, who are deluded and ignorant, worship spirits, ghosts, and evil beings. They perform dark rituals and acts of self-harm.

Chapter 17, Verse 6
The food that people eat also varies according to the gunas. The pure, sattvic food is nourishing and life-sustaining, giving strength and health.

Chapter 17, Verse 7
The rajasik food is bitter, sour, salty, and overly spicy, leading to suffering and agitation, and it is prepared with excessive desire or greed.

Chapter 17, Verse 8
The tamasik food is stale, tasteless, decomposed, and putrid. It is food that causes confusion and dullness of mind, leading to negative effects.

Chapter 17, Verse 9
People who are in the mode of Sattva perform actions that are pure and beneficial to all beings, while those in the mode of Rajas perform actions for selfish desires and for the fulfillment of worldly pleasures.

Chapter 17, Verse 10
The tamasik person performs harmful acts, with no consideration for others, being motivated by ignorance and cruelty.

Chapter 17, Verse 11
People who are pure in heart and free from attachment perform acts of charity and worship with a sense of selflessness, for the sake of spiritual growth.

Chapter 17, Verse 12
The rajasik person performs acts of charity expecting something in return, or to gain reputation and power, driven by selfish desire.

Chapter 17, Verse 13
The tamasik person performs charity with disdain, not caring for the recipient, and without following any religious principles or expectations.

Chapter 17, Verse 14
Those who practice penance in the mode of Sattva do so with a pure heart, seeking to purify the body and mind, and always with an aim to gain knowledge of the self.

Chapter 17, Verse 15
The rajasik person practices penance with self-interest, seeking recognition, or desiring the benefits of the penance, and may harm others while performing it.

Chapter 17, Verse 16
The tamasik person performs penance through self-torture, believing that by harming themselves, they will gain some reward. Such penance is contrary to the spirit of true spirituality.

Chapter 17, Verse 17
People who act in the mode of Sattva speak truthfully, kindly, and beneficially, while those in the mode of Rajas speak with deceit, for personal gain.

Chapter 17, Verse 18
Those in Tamas speak harshly, with the intention to hurt others, and their words bring confusion and pain.

Chapter 17, Verse 19
Those who are in Sattva worship the Supreme Lord, with devotion, humility, and reverence, and seek the highest truth.

Chapter 17, Verse 20
The rajasik worship lesser deities, seeking temporary gains or worldly pleasures, and their worship is often driven by desire or ego.

Chapter 17, Verse 21
The tamasik person worships spirits, ghosts, or dark forces, seeking harmful or malicious ends, and often engages in superstitious or occult practices.

Chapter 17, Verse 22
Such worship, driven by selfishness and ignorance, binds the soul to the cycle of birth and death, as it is not aligned with the highest truth.

Chapter 17, Verse 23
The threefold faith of the living beings corresponds to the three gunas of nature: sattvic, rajasic, and tamasic.

Chapter 17, Verse 24
Whatever worship is done with devotion, and the attitude with which it is performed, determines the nature of the worshiper.

Chapter 17, Verse 25
The Lord affirms that through faith and devotion, one transcends the influence of the gunas and attains liberation.

Chapter 17, Verse 26
The one who is devoted to the divine worships the Supreme Being, who is free from the influence of the gunas, and transcends the cycle of birth and death.

Chapter 17, Verse 27
Therefore, the person who performs actions in accordance with the scriptures, with faith, without selfish desire, and without attachment, transcends the influence of the three gunas.

Chapter 17, Verse 28
Thus, Arjuna, by knowing the nature of faith, food, penance, and worship, a person can understand their spiritual progress and their alignment with the three gunas.

Chapter 18, Verse 1
Arjuna said: O Krishna, you have described the renunciation of action (Sannyasa) and the path of selfless action (Karma Yoga). Please clarify the difference between the two, and which is superior.

Chapter 18, Verse 2
The Blessed Lord said: Renunciation (Sannyasa) and selfless action (Karma Yoga) are both paths to liberation, but one who performs selfless action is superior. Renunciation without action is not the ideal path.

Chapter 18, Verse 3
One who renounces action because of attachment to the fruits of action, thinking that it leads to liberation, is mistaken. True renunciation is in performing actions selflessly without attachment.

Chapter 18, Verse 4
Renunciation, when performed with the right understanding, leads to liberation. This understanding involves recognizing that action must be performed for the sake of duty, without attachment to the results.

Chapter 18, Verse 5
Action performed with desire for its fruits is impure, whereas action performed without desire is pure. One should renounce the fruits of action and work for the welfare of others.

Chapter 18, Verse 6
The true renunciation of action is not the abandonment of the action itself but the abandonment of attachment to its fruits. One who practices this is not bound by karma.

Chapter 18, Verse 7
One who is unable to renounce action entirely should perform their duties with detachment and without desire for the fruits, for such actions are free from bondage.

Chapter 18, Verse 8
Action performed for the benefit of society, without desire for personal gain, is purifying and leads one closer to liberation.

Chapter 18, Verse 9
Actions performed with an attitude of selflessness, without any expectation of reward, are the best path to liberation and are considered the highest form of renunciation.

Chapter 18, Verse 10
One who performs actions selflessly, without attachment or selfish desire, purifies the mind and attains spiritual progress.

Chapter 18, Verse 11
Action is better than inaction, for through inaction, even the maintenance of the body is not possible. Therefore, one should perform actions to fulfill one's duties.

Chapter 18, Verse 12
Even when one performs action, it must be done with the understanding that the body and mind are instruments of the Divine, and all results belong to the Divine.

Chapter 18, Verse 13
The three gunas—Sattva, Rajas, and Tamas—bind the eternal soul to the body, and thus all actions are influenced by these gunas.

Chapter 18, Verse 14
The actions of a person, based on the predominance of Sattva, Rajas, or Tamas, vary. A Sattvic person acts with knowledge, Rajasik people act with desires, and Tamasic people act in ignorance.

Chapter 18, Verse 15
One who performs actions with a sense of duty, in accordance with their nature, without attachment to the results, remains unaffected by the three gunas.

Chapter 18, Verse 16
The threefold division of faith, based on the three gunas, leads one to act in ways that affect their spiritual progress.

Chapter 18, Verse 17
The person who is free from pride, whose actions are not influenced by selfish desires, who performs actions with humility, is unaffected by the three gunas.

Chapter 18, Verse 18
Selfless action leads to liberation, and this type of action is characterized by detachment from the fruits, by performing one's duties with a sense of service and love.

Chapter 18, Verse 19
Actions performed with selfish desires and attachment lead to bondage and suffering, as they keep one entangled in the cycle of birth and death.

Chapter 18, Verse 20
Inaction is never the true path to liberation. One must act, but without desire or attachment to the fruits. This is the path of true renunciation.

Chapter 18, Verse 21
The three gunas—Sattva, Rajas, and Tamas—are responsible for the creation of all beings and the performance of all actions. Understanding this is essential for liberation.

Chapter 18, Verse 22
The person who is affected by Rajas is driven by desires and passion, while the person in Sattva is calm and detached. The Tamasic person is deluded and confused in their actions.

Chapter 18, Verse 23
When one acts with a pure mind, without selfish desires, in accordance with the higher truth, they achieve the state of liberation.

Chapter 18, Verse 24
The fruits of action—whether good or bad—are experienced by the doer based on the nature of their actions and desires.

Chapter 18, Verse 25
Those who are attached to worldly desires will be reborn, while those who perform selfless actions are liberated from the cycle of birth and death.

Chapter 18, Verse 26
The person who acts without attachment and with a spirit of renunciation, who seeks knowledge, performs their duties with devotion, and leads a life of selfless service, attains liberation.

Chapter 18, Verse 27
The mind, when influenced by the three gunas, can either lead one towards bondage or liberation. By understanding the nature of these gunas, one can transcend them.

Chapter 18, Verse 28
The threefold division of faith—based on Sattva, Rajas, and Tamas—determines the type of worship one follows and the manner in which one practices their spiritual duties.

Chapter 18, Verse 29
A person who is free from attachment to the fruits of their actions, who is steadfast in their devotion to the Supreme, and who lives in accordance with the divine will, experiences the peace of liberation.

Chapter 18, Verse 30
Selfless action, performed with the right attitude and in the service of others, is the highest path to liberation and spiritual advancement.

Chapter 18, Verse 31
One who has transcended the three gunas and is unaffected by worldly desires is free from suffering and attains the ultimate state of liberation.

Chapter 18, Verse 32
The soul is eternal, unaffected by birth, death, or the actions of the body. The Supreme Soul is the ultimate reality, and by meditating upon this truth, one can attain liberation.

Chapter 18, Verse 33
One who performs actions with the understanding that they are performing the will of the Supreme, and who is unaffected by the fruits of those actions, attains the highest state of spiritual realization.

Chapter 18, Verse 34
The highest form of renunciation is the renunciation of attachment and desire, not the renunciation of action itself. True renunciation involves acting without desire for the fruits.

Chapter 18, Verse 35
By renouncing selfish desires and performing one's duties in a selfless manner, one can achieve liberation and transcend the cycle of birth and death.

Chapter 18, Verse 36
Actions performed with a sense of duty and detachment, guided by knowledge and wisdom, lead to liberation.

Chapter 18, Verse 37
Those who have attained the highest state of self-realization, who live in accordance with the divine will, are liberated and free from the bondage of material existence.

Chapter 18, Verse 38
By following the path of selfless action, one attains the Supreme and experiences the ultimate state of peace and bliss.

Chapter 18, Verse 39
The highest path to liberation is the path of knowledge, where one sees the divine in all beings, without attachment or selfish desire.

Chapter 18, Verse 40
All actions, whether good or bad, are ultimately governed by the three gunas. By transcending the gunas, one attains liberation.

Chapter 18, Verse 41
The person who is free from attachment and performs actions in accordance with the divine will is liberated and attains the highest state of spiritual realization.

Chapter 18, Verse 42
The person who has transcended the three gunas, who acts selflessly and lives in accordance with the supreme truth, attains liberation.

Chapter 18, Verse 43
By understanding the nature of the soul and the Supreme, and by performing selfless actions, one can transcend the limitations of the material world and attain the state of liberation.

Chapter 18, Verse 44
Selfless service, devotion to the Supreme, and the renunciation of selfish desires are the paths to spiritual freedom and liberation.

Chapter 18, Verse 45
One who performs actions with a sense of duty, without attachment to the fruits, attains liberation and becomes free from the cycle of birth and death.

Chapter 18, Verse 46
The Supreme Self is eternal, beyond the three gunas. By meditating on the Supreme and transcending the three gunas, one attains liberation.

Chapter 18, Verse 47
One who has transcended the gunas and performs actions in accordance with the Supreme will, without selfish desires, attains the ultimate state of liberation.

Chapter 18, Verse 48
The person who performs actions in the service of others, with humility and devotion, attains the highest state of spiritual realization.

Chapter 18, Verse 49
One who performs selfless actions, guided by wisdom and compassion, becomes free from the limitations of the material world and attains liberation.

Chapter 18, Verse 50
By renouncing attachment to the results of actions and performing them for the greater good, one attains the highest state of spiritual freedom.

Chapter 18, Verse 51
Through wisdom, devotion, and selfless service, one can overcome the limitations of the material world and attain the ultimate state of liberation.

Chapter 18, Verse 52
The soul is eternal, unchanging, and unaffected by the actions of the body. By meditating on this truth, one attains liberation.

Chapter 18, Verse 53
By performing actions with a sense of duty and detachment, one can transcend the influence of the three gunas and attain the highest state of liberation.

Chapter 18, Verse 54
The one who has attained the highest state of self-realization, who lives in accordance with the divine will, becomes free from the cycle of birth and death.

Chapter 18, Verse 55
By following the path of selfless action and devotion to the Supreme, one transcends the limitations of the material world and attains liberation.

Chapter 18, Verse 56
The Supreme is beyond the three gunas, and by meditating on the Supreme and performing actions in accordance with the divine will, one attains the state of liberation.

Chapter 18, Verse 57
By transcending the three gunas and performing actions selflessly, one attains liberation and becomes one with the Supreme.

Chapter 18, Verse 58
By constantly meditating on the Supreme and performing selfless actions, one transcends the gunas and attains the ultimate state of liberation.

Chapter 18, Verse 59
Selfless actions, performed with devotion and detachment, lead to the highest state of spiritual freedom and liberation.

Chapter 18, Verse 60
The one who has transcended the three gunas and is devoted to the Supreme attains liberation and becomes one with the eternal truth.

Chapter 18, Verse 61
By meditating on the Supreme and performing actions selflessly, one attains the highest state of spiritual realization.

Chapter 18, Verse 62
By surrendering all actions to the Supreme and acting selflessly, one transcends the gunas and attains the ultimate state of liberation.

Chapter 18, Verse 63
Thus, having heard this teaching, let the one who is free from attachment act according to the divine will.

Chapter 18, Verse 64
Do not be attached to the results of actions and perform them for the sake of others. This will lead to the highest state of liberation.

Chapter 18, Verse 65
Through wisdom, devotion, and selfless service, one can overcome the cycle of birth and death and attain the ultimate liberation.

Chapter 18, Verse 66
By transcending the influence of the gunas and acting selflessly, one attains the supreme state of liberation and becomes one with the eternal truth.

Chapter 18, Verse 67
The one who performs actions in service to others, with devotion and humility, attains the highest state of spiritual realization.

Chapter 18, Verse 68
One who has overcome the gunas and transcended the limitations of the material world becomes one with the Supreme and attains liberation.

Chapter 18, Verse 69
By living according to the divine will and performing selfless actions, one attains the ultimate state of liberation.

Chapter 18, Verse 70
Thus, the path of selfless action, devotion, and renunciation leads one to the supreme truth and liberation from the cycle of birth and death.

Chapter 18, Verse 71
By living in harmony with the divine will and transcending the three gunas, one attains the highest state of liberation.

Chapter 18, Verse 72
The one who is devoted to the Supreme, who lives in accordance with the divine will, and who performs selfless actions attains liberation.

Chapter 18, Verse 73
Thus, the highest state of liberation is attained through selfless action, devotion, and the renunciation of selfish desires.

Chapter 18, Verse 74
One who is devoted to the Supreme, and who acts with humility and selflessness, attains the ultimate state of liberation and spiritual freedom.

Chapter 18, Verse 75
By meditating on the Supreme and surrendering all actions to the divine will, one attains the highest state of liberation.

Chapter 18, Verse 76
Through selfless service, devotion, and detachment, one transcends the limitations of the material world and attains the ultimate liberation.

Chapter 18, Verse 77
The one who is devoted to the Supreme and who acts with a sense of duty and selflessness attains the highest state of spiritual freedom.

Chapter 18, Verse 78
Thus, by following the path of selfless action, devotion, and renunciation, one attains liberation and becomes one with the Supreme.